hello ? hello ? with whom am i speaking ? eh , silvia , yes . what is your name ? nice to meet you . em , and where are you from ? aha . yes . and where are you from ? and you , what country are you from ? what , from what part of cuba are you ? ah . and from which , which neighborhood ? from NNP . and him ? well , look , that eh , your parents , how long have they been married ? are you married ? no , i used to be but i got divorced about ten years ago . what about you ? yes , what do you think about the changes that have taken place in the marriage institution over the past twenty to thirty years ? they want us to speak about marriages . changes in marriage ? well , i believe that , in general , they 've been , i mean , they 've been , oh , it has VBN . eh , em , people , looked and me and said , look , you have a good family . why did you leave home to live alone ? like , she did n't go to live with a boyfriend , to live we 're here in new york , and you ? exactly . and where are you from ? i 'm colombian . and you ? and how did the colombians get so far from home ? ah , well , how nice . and you like , you like washington ? i do n't really now much about , how is it said ? three thousand calls they got , CD NN was married or not divorce , etc , so i do n't really now , are you married ? oh nice , and family ? , kids ? oh nice , really nice and the one year older , does he sleep good at night ? they say that milk has a , a chemical , ¿right ? , that helps , to , to sleep so , when you ca n't sleep well , you drink a NN of warm milk . no because they have , so many hours since you gave him the last milk and well , at his age , he still has trouble with teeth too , ¿right ? i do n't know , to , ¿right ? , we take her to the park to run , to get plenty tired so , NNP says , what 's this ? and the book says , its a bus . and what 's this , this is a car , this is the kitchen , this is a NN . where are you going , to virginia ? ah , that 's good , ah , you are going to like it , you have been there before , have n't you ? you have n't ? you 're going to like it , virginia is so pretty and it 's not that far away from the beach , just a bit , not that far away from the beach and there 's not much to do , almost everything oh go out , or go out you know to VB , or NN mountains , or everything more than anything nature stuff , there 's not much diversity , you understand ? hello ? hello ? or of any other thing . what do you want to talk about , about what , what happened with katrina , or of what do you want ? oh , we can talk about marriage , it does n't matter . are you married ? you ? eighteen ? latin ? oh , i 'm also latin . what ? what ? panamanian ? oh , i 'm puerto rican . same , what 's up ? oh , so . and , then you what do you think about marriage ? you 're never going to get married or , you think what ? that 's how it is . and do you work ? hm hm . and your husband ? what 's he going to be ? oh , where ? and you what did you used to do ? and , why ? aha so you do a little of everything , right ? yeah , and you , do you have a NN ? hm mm how did you hear about this survey ? which one was the first you did ? and how much did you get paid for that ? one hundred seventy two ? oh , for each one ? eh , and for the first one ? how much ? but i think that was for the spanish calls i made , because i did n't even know , i was surprised when i went to check my email , i went RB ? ' a fifty dollars check , ok fine and i thought WP will this be for ? ' but i VBD it yes , do yo have any ? yes , i am here trying to find someone for him . because he is working right now , like me , do you know who has experience ? yes , where do you search them , on the computer ? in , do you use the internet ? and what do you do in the internet ? hm , what , which internet NN do you use ? does n't your husband get jealous ? it 's not an issue , so yes , how old is your daughter ? okay , what , what are you like ? and what , what are you like ? like what ? like , like what do you look like ? ¿you ? uh um , yeah , i spend all day playing with my children , so , in all of this . every time , and , ¿where are you ? , ¿you are , uh , where ? ¿what , where ? ¿where in the united states are you ? ¿and you are ? uh um , ¿and when will you go there , to your country again ? how are you ? good thanks , my name is carmen from chicago . and you ? how long have you been married ? oh , but you have a lot of communication with your second husband , ¿right ? ¿do you have children ? , oh wow , from the first , and what from the second ? and , and do you communicate a lot with your kids ? yes thank god i too aha , aha , aha , do you work ? and does your husband work ? okay but aha aha and you told me you were from nebraska ? in chicago ? where ? and what nationality are you ? what ? what nationality are you ? and not before ? no ? you did n't get along well ? and how did you last that long with him ? aha , aha , and you like your kids ? or like his family hello ? hello ? hi , how are you ? ah , fine , my name is NNP , what 's your name ? oh , okay , ah , today 's topic is marriage . right ? oh , okay . okay , um , in what state are you , NNP ? pardon ? in what state are you ? new york . and you ? i do n't know . what time do you have ? ah , twenty four years old . and you ? but , am , for how long have you been taking calls , or is this the first time that you 're taking a call in , in the fisher study ? what nationality are you ? what nationality ? what what happened ? you have one ? mm . but , what ? um , when i was in high school , my best friend was , was puerto rican . yes . from , um , from where ? from carolina , i believe it was . yes , um , what do you , what do you do ? oh , really ? where ? no ? after well , and , and , did they do it to you , or you did it yourself ? and do you have , have NNS ? what was it ? no , because they almost do n't see it . no , no , i 'm not like the people who , how do you say ? ah , em they get the little rings . but , um , ah , that , ah , ok and , um , you said that you 're twenty two . right ? what ? that you said you are twenty two years old , correct ? okay , am , and you , am , are you in school , or , also , or ? how much did they pay you for the survey ? pardon me ? how much . . . for the survey , for the first one ? can you give me a second ? hello ? hello ? oh . the , the , how ? ah , i want to ask you . no , that you said , how you were taking a NN , on the phone ? oh . okay . okay , and , um , what else was it ? i was going to ask you , and , i 'm thinking . and you were born in puerto rico , or were you born here in the united state ? what , oh you 've never gone to puerto rico ? is he colombian also ? what ? no . he 's american . in what , in what do you work over there in washington ? in the NNP ? ah , my cousin is in that . from where , from iraq ? oh , they sent him to new orleans ? where is he ? oh , i see . and , and , and where is he VBD , in what , in what state ? in what state ? oh , ¿yes ? , the family , our family , my mom 's and his , they 're all in philadelphia eh , my name is annie . and , my name is annie and i live in miami and i 'm also puerto rican . hello ? the word to discuss they said was marriage . so what do you think of marriage ? how many years have you been married ? and are you married ? what ? at what age did you get married ? how old , how do you think that you were able to VB these thirteen years ? um , again , please ? oh , you 're both religious ? also this . so , has this been your only couple then ? has this been your only marriage ? wow wow . and how old are your kids ? my latin friends that i also know that their marriage is still a little bit harder . because the husband does n't necessarily eh help or you know ? good , uh , good afternoon , uh , ¿who do i have the pleasure to talk to ? silvia , ¿how are you ? fine , thanks , ¿where do you live ? yes , ¿where are you calling from ? ¿how 's the weather over there ? yes , little by little , how 's everything ? so , my spanish is not , well , it is as good as should be , right ? no , i don´t think that´s correct , i don´t think so because why ? because they will not look for it in several languages . in what ? , which languages ? by the , the , the , how do you say it ? so then what was it , marriages , right ? and what do you want to talk about marriage , are you married ? yes , and you ? and where do you live ? it 's not the same way right ? , they do n't treat you and you have to put up with the , the reasons for people and that 's harder , staying together , uh , as boyfriends , you know , because you can get out whenever you want to , ¿right ? , because there 's no , nothing 's legal right , because it 's more , it 's harder to stay together because that way , so you love each other more , because there 's nothing to , you do n't have to be there , ¿right ? or i went out for lunch , right ? when you are already married . you have to do some things , because there is , how you call it ? , there is more work to do in the house , you know , because of the marriage , to maintain the marriage ah how are you ? where are you ? i 'm in philadelphia . yes , have you been living in nebraska a long time ? how is it over there , very cold in winter ? ah , okay , and what state is nearby ? are you going to receive people from there in your state ? where ? ah yes and after , i do n't know if they will give them a house or what ? a different NN . no ? the beach , it has beach . are you having dinner ? aha , what ? were you eating ? aha oh yes , and have a lot of people from this program called you ? what ? have a lot of people from this program from the university called you ? of the language of this that we are talking . did you put all the hours , or just at night ? really ? , i sometimes ask , to reach the CD calls oh , in english , you can ? and you are married , right ? but you have a lot of practice with spanish , do you speak a lot of spanish ? is you husband american ? and you are originally , where is your family from ? what ? you guys , do you watch the NNS , the programs in english or in spanish ? aha me too , did you see the NN ? oh , it already came , yes i have it here , and you not seeing it there ? hello ? yes , look , and what country are you from ? no . because i think that they try to make it how do you say it ? general yes , but i say , how , how do they find people out of the area ? yes , how many years have you been married ? how curious , right ? i was talking yesterday with a man who was also from connecticut who told me that he 'd been married twice , but it was all that when he got married that it 's different , you can be , how do you say ? eh , it 's not the same living together than being JJ living NN you in your house and me in mine . you know ? when you were separated well aha . and , and why did you get divorced ? because it went eh , your marriage went bad or ? ah , how many kids do you have ? yes , look , where do you live in connecticut ? like by where ? i , i know a little bit of connecticut . ah . and , and , you go to new york to work ? ah ? do you guys go to new york to work ? aha , and , and , have a lot of interesting stories about the clients you have in the NN ? always happens , yes . and , how many kids do you have ? and , do you maintain a good relationship after the divorce with the father ? yes , and was n't it really difficult raising five kids ? yes , yes , and have you felt that it 's more difficult to raise kids RB here than in puerto rico ? and the kids VBP them , you know ? they do n't know so , your JJ hits your daughter ? they , they treat , well , i would n't let that mine as soon as i see that he 's not acting well , mine , and i would say let him be a NN , but he was n't , how do you say ? such a shame , right ? yes , so sad , right ? can you hear me ? hello ? can you hear me ? i 'm joe , what 's your name ? where are you from jose ? from philadelphia ? yes , and you ? i 'm from colorado , what nationality are you ? and how is guatemala , is it nice over there ? oh , yes ? that too , that too , and where are you from ? american schools , american universities , you start working here , you , you are no longer from guatemala , for instance , right ? but when i , for instance , go back to guatemala , i feel like it is not , seriously , it is not my country , really , i do n't know . because i have spent so much time here in the united states , right ? no , VBZ exactly , no , no . and you , you 've been to philadelphia before ? i work with a NN at my company that 's located in tennessee , that 's his area , and his NN covers tennessee , NNP , louisiana and , ¿what was the other ? , NNP that 's what she thought , yea , uh , interesting , ¿right ? , that she never , she had never seen that yeah , ¿right ? , but it 's a , it 's a very beautiful state , it has a lot , it 's less VBN than other NN , than other states with , with lot 's of like gangs or , uh , it 's more NN , ¿right ? what are you studying ? ah yes , that 's great , do you really like it , do you want to work on that ? hello , what ? hello , i 'm , fine , and you ? ah , how are you ? we spoke the other day ? how are you ? how are you ? son , ah ? fine , here a bit tired , i was painting my house ah , can you give me a second ? okay , yes oh okay , no problem then , what 's new ? how come ? oh , another NN ? oh okay of what ? so , what did they tell us ? that today we have to talk again about the same or and how many calls can you make in a day , on e one or two ? and listen , you could do it twice ? so that , and your daughter , where is she ? how do you say ? ah , that you can talk you can see the person so he started to say hello , i 'm at home oh , that 's the , the NN ? i do n't go to the door , instead i say , what do you want ? fight about what ? hmm , but only VBZ or what ? aye , all three ? oh my god , ¿why , fighting over what ? um , oh no , it 's not like before , that you hit each other and , well , the fight is over , and you go on , ¿right ? uh , no , it 's not good , it 's true , there are , ¿and what do you say , will you never go to your country ? ¿do n't you want to see it at all ? what ? mm , and do you guys have a big house here ? how big is the house ? how many bedrooms do you have ? you you ? your husband what does he do your husband ? he was a NN did he told me ? and what else is there to do around here ? hello ? hello ? ay , how are you ? also . and you ? fine , thanks . where are you ? have you received many calls with the program plan ? ah , NN . well , move forward and that everything 's good , no ? ah . what 's the weather like there , a lot of rain ? and do you live alone , are you with your family ? you only have one son , also ? ah . and have you been virginia many years or ? for the school , really ? did you move a long time ago or before ? and now . huh ? really ? i tell you , i would n't go if a lot of time had n't passed , no ? even if it 's close , no ? it affected me a lot . and now i 'm affected by that of new orleans so many things , right ? even if you do n't hear much here about the hurricane . in this country yes , right ? the red cross , right ? hmm . what will they do with this . happened after what they tried is for people and great , or they stay where they are ? because this will be a good time to go to ah ah ah , true . i think that those who are most used to it to will want to come back , right ? that i would n't know how it is because if the house is in a dry and peaceful place right ? that 's fine i understand if they remove them . oh god , what a NN . they say is the worst NN that has VBN , right ? this two those year they 're smart they 're open still ever since the first day , it seems , right ? i do n't know if the church or what , what happened ? aye , what dog do you have ? is he big or little ? how big is he , a french NN ? like a NNP ? and so is he really sweet ? ah , okay . how are you ? fine , and you ? ah , how many kids do you have ? what age ? ah , a kid 's clown ? yes . ah , you work in this ? ah , you 're a teacher ? how many kids do you have ? so then i have family in manhattan . have you always lived in georgia ? what country are you from ? oh , yes . ¿and where are you from ? yes , ¿is this the first call you make ? yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , it 's true , in fact he has , ¿and do you work or stay at home ? ah , how nice . and what does he work in ? uh uh . oh . and do you like georgia ? and you ? uh uh . ah , oh . okay . because i suppose it 's RB better than peru , right ? but , let see what else . we have to talk like ten minutes , right ? i 'm looking at this of nine eleven . ah , and you , what , were you there ? i see , anyway . what else do you do ? what else ? do you have lots of friends in georgia ? what church do you belong to ? oh , okay , NNP ? oh , are n't those the ones that have a NN ? uh ? oh , okay , okay , okay , okay . and your kids dress like that also ? no ? oh , not yet . uh uh , oh , and how did you get into it ? when you came to georgia or do you have that in peru ? oh , that 's good then you are thin , right ? wow , then all the calls you 've made you can talk about anything ? ¿are you separated or are you there ? how are you ? nice to meet you josefina , how are you ? where are you , far ? so we are in the , the same side but you are in the area of the NN how are you ? have you been getting calls for a long time ? ah okay perfect , and what do you think of it well you 've only talked with one other person only right ? yes and you ? we are starting , yes em well the two people i spoke with were very pleasant , and do you study or are you working ? it 's a very old man , uh , that , ¿what did you her the subject was ? , because i think it was something about religion , ¿right ? or , yeah , i think so , i think that a person 's religion is very different from another , they do n't unite at all , ¿right ? or get along better because of it , ¿right ? , i think that inside , even inside a religion there 's a lot of people that sees it one way and another people sees it differently and things like that , like a religion from far away , ¿right ? , like that one , the NN , or well , although there is a lot of people here in the united states now , ¿right ? of other religion ? or of the christians themselves ? different churches or schools for example there the NN who have a different practice to , what could it be ? to the NNP , or the catholic right ? also are , and there are those who say no , i 'm christian and one tells them me too they say , no you are not christian you believe in the NNS for example , the jehovah NNS have a lot of differences in their practice right ? i think that religion is something to not even talk about because it gets in brings problems right ? for example at work one starts talking about that and well , one gets into um problems they say the same but VB it differently , ¿right ? , for example , sometimes , um now , yes , in general terms i do like to listen , uh , for example , there are a lot , there is a channel of only religious talk from different parts , ¿right ? well , from different churches , and , uh , i listen to that and i get relaxed , it makes me very easy because it 's like they 're all talking about things , well , that i understand , ¿right ? and well , i take it as some people that want to do some good for others and i think that 's good , but there might be someone that VBZ something like that and says `` what a mess , ¿what are they saying ? , it 's not like that '' , and what not uh , um , it also depends on how you want to see it , ¿right ? exactly , exactly , ¿and have you been living there in miami for long ? and did you studied a career ? i have realize that it helps , i mean , it 's nice to help people , right ? , an the teacher , imagine , how many kids you can guide for the rest of the life , right ? and from which grade you started ? oh , that 's wonderful , you sound like a CD , CD , CD year old , and you are ? , if you have worked then no together , ¿right ? , but if they 're going to be , they 're going to be of close age , ¿right ? oh , that 's so nice , god , god NN you , so they 're going to be like that , of very close age , ¿right ? that 's very good , so they can be little partners , i had only one son and he feels RB and i imagine that , well it 's always good to have more than one , ¿right ? how are you ? here 's norma from atlanta georgia . ah , okay , and what opinion do you have regarding what they just said , of religions ? okay , what was , what was your topic ? ah , it was , if the religions VBP , no . what opinions do you have of the christian or muslim religions ? ah , that 's why they called you ? how old are you ? yes , what do you do for work ? what do you do for work ? you do tattoos ? do you have some ? ah , they say , they said that , what do you think , for example , about the problem of homosexuality ? no , to you ? ¿and does it bother you ? no , i , i mean , it 's , it 's a , a , it is against religion , it is against god 's NNS , but i mean , each one , ¿right ? , does their life , you know if oh , ¿yes ? , oh , i did n't know that yes , NNP you do that ? if we are were NNP , all of us . what are you ? what religion ? what ? no , how is it in english ? NNP what ? have you ever seen them ? hmm . you never read about , well , i suppose that you 've read the bible once , or no ? no never , not even when you were younger ? right ? , every one , nobody NNS you to be religious , to belong to a political party or different groups , ¿right ? , that 's in your heart , if you want to and you , that you go to , you go to church every sunday , ¿right ? and do you , ¿do you wear a NN or something ? ¿do you use like a special NN or something ? right ? , and the men use , it 's called a sort of , it 's called `` NN '' , with like a NN called NN other than , ¿you only eat what ? yes here they do n't do that , but i , and they do it over there ? hi good evening , who do i have the pleasure of speaking with ? how is it going ? yes that 's what it seemed like right how weird , i do n't know , have you talked to other people or not ? ¿and you ? aha , aha , and from what countries and religions are your parents ? and is it to raise , well for instance , with other people that have raised in such homes ? of a father , of parents being one christian and the other jewish eh let 's say in situations in which people VBP more their religion , how do people feel being raised in such a home ? and and what do you think of the question if the diversity of religions creates NNS between people or , or brings them together ? eh do you have kids or ? ah yes yes i have two kids one is seven and the other is three and you ? what religion and nationality are you ? aha and what country are you from ? aha and what do you think about the religions that say that . . . ? they are like fanatics , ¿right ? , they're so , they , yes , they are very , like they use their religion for violence , it seems , ¿right ? NNP , have you been ? why do you VB your head ? especially if you live in a temple right ? why did you get into that religion ? may be your husband or someone you knew and why do you eat meat ? you do n't eat , you do n't eat milk and NN ? and i , well what can you do ? right ? every soul is spiritual and has free will , you ca n't force a kid or a person you ca n't VB the person or he 'll become JJ , NN , right ? and VB his believe or the , the way of life he is having , i mean , it 's something natural , it comes from the heart um , how many kids do you have ? and where are you living ? that 's why and you ? what music do they dance to in your country ? what is it called what you dance ? yes , what 's good here ? the drug ballads are good . and does NNP VB you or not ? really ? hm mm well , yes , like you ca n't dedicate songs , ¿right ? quiet , right ? now you 're living in puerto rico or san juan or where ? sorry ? where are you living now ? but in what part ? oh yeah ? they play it there ? because i sometimes see it , but it 's always pure hip hip that 's why it is that what are you studying over there ? yes , that would be good , something like that . send ? are you studying in philadelphia ? ah , i didn´t hear , what , sorry ? NNP you studying in philadelphia or do you live there RB ? and which clubs do they have for hispanic there , nothing ? hello ? hello ? hello ? hi , yes , who 's speaking ? aha . with junior . who 's speaking ? what is , what 's your name ? junior ? hello , i 'm nicole . where are you ? nicole . what ? nicole . aha . how are you ? ha , ha , very good . and you ? fine , and you ? where are you ? eh , my , you do n't understand my spanish , or spanish in general ? ah , okay um , well , i 'll try to talk JJR then um , where are you from ? new york , and you ? and you ? ah , from new york . what part ? how old are you ? and what do you do here ? ah , what do i do here ? yes . and you ? what do you do ? yes . what do you do ? teacher ? oh , what grade ? oh , okay . oh , okay and what country are you from ? and did you were born here ? i was born here in new york . are you single ? married ? what ? and what do you do to have fun ? what type of music do you like ? was it easy ? latin music or music ? do you have a kid or not ? sorry ? and you , eh , are you married ? aha . and this must be a lot of work , no ? yes , it 's a lot of work for me , how do you say ? i , i have fun with her . it 's hard when , yes it 's hard when she asked me , today , NN ? i say , oh , yes , at grandma 's house , in the house of her mom . ah , really ? yes . yes , and do you dance ? what did you say ? yes , how you call it ? i was at a concert like two or three days ago huh ? and how was the concert ? yeah , it was but , how do you say ? the other boys , they are from , they 're the bachata is pretty big there . well you know english perfectly . do you speak , do you know english well ? NN , sorry ? yes , and you , do you spend many time on the computer , or not ? oh , and what do you use ? , NNP and that ? excuse me ? which internet are you using ? what am i using ? which internet ? yes , so you see who they are , listen , right ? yes . do they also have the songs by internet or no ? and how are you ? like how do you look ? how do you look ? how ? how , how am i . i 'm white i have dark hair . i 'm average NN . eh . i do n't know that 's how i am . what school are you in ? i 'm going to go learn over there . in what school ? how fun , and what do you do now ? i mean , are you studying and working at the same time ? or ? and you like it like that ? i mean , online ? what was that ? but it 's , how do you say ? yes , i 'm here because she 's always with them . eh , good afternoon , who do i have the pleasure of talking to ? oh , how are you ? very cold there or very hot ? look , what 's today topic ? really ? i do n't know . you speak or i speak ? well , you speak . what , what country are you from , carmen ? and you ? okay . what do you think about marriage ? aha . why ? aha , aha , aha , how long have you been married ? oh , but you were ? ah . aha , aha , aha , it 's true . very true what you are saying . and where did you meet your husband ? oh . you are like , like he 's VBG the apartment , the room , the apartment with you or what ? eh ? oh , okay , okay , okay . but are they good kids ? look , then ah mm . oh , and do you have kids ? oh , women and men ? yes , that gives one so much , so much happiness , right ? and he says , `` and from this where did it come out ? `` and it 's that and you know something ? they never learn their NN aha , aha , aha , aha , no , they say , how is it ? they never know what they have until they lose it . aha , aha , aha . but if it keeps being the same ? because there 's a saying that says that the woman makes the man , no ? eh , how are you ? fine and you ? bessy , from , from where are you from ? and you ? aha ah , so and well , from salvador , how do you listen to music over there ? okay and you ? in spanish really ? okay and in english do you like any music in english ? mm yes what other type of music do you like ? of the , what is it ? indians from india aha , they should be this , ah , what 's it called ? not be VBG . and , and who play it ? the hi hispanics hello ? yes , hello ? ah , my name 's alex , eh , i 'm here in los angeles . and you ? in seattle ? where are you from ? i 'm from panama . and you ? ah , okay . yes , i 've been here for what ? fifteen years . well . and what do you think about music today ? ah , yes . the old ballads ? it 's not the same . no ? aha . who has these songs ? yes , yes and also another venezuelan . what 's his name ? the NNP . well , music NNS with life , you know ? how old are you ? how much ? do you remember NNP NNP ? what ? merengue must be quite popular in panama , is n't it ? but merengue existed twenty or thirty years ago ? hello , how are you ? fine , fine , and you ? fine , and where are you calling from ? do you go a lot to the clubs and dance and that ? yes . it 's true . but , do you listen to latin music or , american music or what ? no , eh , i do n't know why . and you ? and and , what else ? i forgot what i was going to say , but , but we do listen to music a lot and who knows ? maybe the NNS you know , the , maybe your daughter is going to be a JJ because i , outside of the car , the only thing i hear is you know and i can hear nothing else , so what are they hearing ? just that ? ¿hello ? ¿hello ? ¿hello ? hi , ¿who am i talking to ? NNP , ¿who 's this ? nicole , ¿did we talk yesterday or not ? yes , the same , ¿how are you ? fine , and you ? fine , fine , well , this time , uh , ¿did you listen to the music recording or not ? well , i do n't know what else to say about the music , ¿what else are we going to say about music ? ¿what kind of music do you like ? yeah , JJ one ? ¿do you like NNP NNP ? and what other type of music do you like ? classic , no way ? but i like music , do you like country music or not ? you do n't like country ? me neither but some songs i like because my sisters like those people like NNP NNP and those people . like , you do n't know ? you do n't like fifty cents ? you do n't know ? i do n't know ah yes , fifty cents has a song of candy shop or no ? and , ¿do you like to dance or ? VB ? VB much ? , ¿do you like to dance ? VB do you dance that ? VB ? , i mean , i think that things . . . it 's just that when i listen to music at home i kinda like to listen to the lyrics and do you dance it ? do you dance ? but do you dance , do you dance ? how ? mm . in . yes , the music . the , do you play any NNS or something ? uh huh . and ¿did you like the NN at high school or not ? ¿what ? ah what ? good afternoon , ¿who am i talking to ? ¿oh ye ? oh , well , look at that , the same with me , uh , through my daughter , ¿and what does your son study ? oh , ok , in war , ¿what 's it called ? , war NNP PRP$ daughter ? yes , quite hard , it has been VBN , it has been VBN as hard and where are you from ? yes , yes , yes , oh well , now , we have to speak about music . cuban people are quite good at it , is n't it ? and all these kind of songs and now that i am am a grown up i like to dance well all the retired and all . and what about you ? ah the it truly comes from there ? yes , i also have this , this knowledge , so i think that yes , it has a lot or relation and has a lot of feeling . no ? how much is it ? and , ¿how many years ago did you get here ? oh , well , but well , so you are . . . you have been here your whole life , ¿right ? aha and what part of cuba are you from ? and have you gone back there ? and you all how many years has it been since you left mexico ? NNP . and what made you want to come ? yes , yes , yes . and philadelphia , why did you choose philadelphia ? and how many kids do you have ? ah there in new york , right ? ah , how nice , how interesting and what did your daughter study ? exactly , exactly . and she 's already , and she 's already married ? yes , and yours ? coming from such a different culture , right ? sure , sure because university is pretty VBG like , NNS . it VBZ things right ? besides , well . you need to be a really strong kid , no ? NNP , hi , ¿how are you ? fine , ¿and you ? that 's good , and , ¿what do you think about music ? ¿what kind of music do you like ? ¿where are you from ? ¿why ? ¿where does your mom live ? oh , yes , i live in seattle , ¿where in canada do you live ? yeah , we 've gone there , suddenly we get in the car , `` ¿where do we go ? `` , `` i do n't know '' , `` ¿do you have your stuff ? `` , `` well , let 's go , let 's go to canada '' , `` ok '' oh my god , i 'm surprised that this kid when he first got here . and the other day he was VBG , i told him , where did all of that come from ? , and he said , well , just by listening to it , RB . nice , oh , JJ husband says `` what , ¿are you romantic today ? `` , `` no , i found it '' , and i say , i start to sing `` my house '' and he starts laughing i tell him `` well , yeah , you make me happy like that '' , i tell him `` hey , ¿do n't people tell you i look younger than i am ? , it 's because of the music boy '' , and he starts laughing right , and VBZ he understands spanish or ? just in spanish . my husband said `` what if i do n't know spanish , how can i know what it says there ? `` , and he started reading and he VBD for me and i told him `` yeah , you got it '' , he says `` ok '' and , ¿how old are you ? ¿and how long have you been in canada ? i have , uh , what ? , yes , fifteen here too oh what a lady 's man , how much did that cost him ? without that 's right . and what city did you go to ? your husband , for the operation ? in NNP , that 's where i live , also oh , good night , i 'm norma from georgia , here in atlanta , georgia , how are you ? i 'm fine thank you . how many children do you have ? oh , i have two . one of them is seven years old and the other one is three years old . and yourself ? aha . i talked to you , right ? oh , what did we talk about , marriage ? what type of music do you like ? what happened ? so eh , in your , in your church they play christian music , but salsa music , right ? music helps to relax , it has a message . no and , different types of messages , there 's spiritual music or even classical music , is n't it ? ¿oh yes ? ¿do you like JJ peruvians music ? and the music , they 're very nice . they 're like very JJ from their country , they 're very different . so , i like it a lot . i love to hear the , peruvians music because of the , like the one with NN , ¿is that what they use ? it is the peruvians and who else play it ? there is another another nationality that sound very RB the , the , oh , aha , aha , bolivia , and the NNP the argentinean too , right ? well , the argentinean uses more the , how you call it ? the , that VBP that they , somehow throw . to the rhythm of the cable i do n't know how they call it yes , it all sounds very familiar , it 's the hispanic culture , is n't it ? in south america , so , this , bolivia and peru are kind of more , oh , similar . do you know how to play any NNS ? yes , music is interesting , is n't it ? it sends cultural messages for all the people , you can show off your culture , the culture of every place , every country . yes , to bring in more people , right ? hello ? hello ? hello , how are you ? fine , and you ? where are you ? in what part of nebraska ? i was once in NNP , like oh , and did you like it ? oh , yes . aha . and where do you live now ? ah , yes ? from where ? and , ¿what music do you like to listen to ? ¿and what singers do you like ? right , um , ¿and you ? and , ¿do you know who NNP is ? , you remember NNP , ¿do n't you ? VB ? and , i do n't know , ¿do you think that the music has a lot to do with your life ? and there in nebraska , NNP you find a place to dance JJ music ? really ? and does your husband like to dance ? ¿you do n't know what bachata is ? you are from the dominican republic , right ? oh , really ? um . how strange right ? ¿hello ? ¿hello ? yes , ¿who am i talking to ? oh , ¿where are you at , mercedes ? um , i 'm talking from pennsylvania , ¿and you ? ¿where in pennsylvania are you ? and you ? nice to meet you , ¿what country are you from ? oh , and where are you from ? and how many calls have you done so far ? ¿and where does merengue come from , which part of the caribbean did it start on ? VB what ? merengue , i know it 's caribbean , but ¿where is it from ? , more specifically in let 's say , in cuba what would she be considered ? mm . look , and how long have you already been here in the united states ? and how long have you been here ? uh huh , and , ¿what kind of music do you like here ? , i think the one here , well or , in spanish , ¿do you like music in english better or in spanish ? , ¿do you listen to a lot of music in spanish ? ¿and do you listen to it on NN or do you go to the opera to listen to it ? maybe like more , uh , commercial , right ? the other one also seems like he 's had a little opera is that NNP NNP , ¿have you heard him ? and ¿did you like it ? quite , yes , uh , NNP was it the one i went to see ? , oh , i do n't remember . of course it 's in italy , i was in italy , but it 's about two hello very good and you ? how nice NNP i 'm michael how are you ? ah well and what do you think ? eh you already went to brazil or not ? what ? you went to brazil already ? what part of brazil are you from ? a few years and , where are you calling from ? and , ¿do you play any NNS ? yeah , a little , i want to learn piano but it 's very hard , ¿do you play something ? ¿what ? uh , do you go to music concerts RB ? from a band that 's called [ . . . ] do you know it ? you do n't like it , then ? but to me , well , to me , it seems to be very JJ music also , and if you do n't really understand the words , you know ? i suppose that you also lose a lot that must have been very hard right ? because in all the cities there were NNS right ? yes , yes , yes , it was , i do n't know , a very strong global reaction ¿right ? , because , well , it was really nothing like that had ever happened before , ¿right ? , and besides , all the NNS of political NN there were and and they went out to VB too , ¿right ? , so well , it was a complicated moment , but within the NN , it was , i do n't know , you realize that people can really do something ¿right ? because i heard that the people was a little bit JJ , ¿right ? hmm hmm yeah oh well it 's a pity , no ? because it seems like people were VBN and oh , which one is it , the last one ? and comes , comes , what 's her name ? , ah what university ? penn ? NN you study in NNP ? i , so we are now going to talk , okay ? we got it 's kind of weird , this is your first call then ? well , what do you do ? well , how ? so , uh , i got out with the master , ¿right ? , not that it makes much of a difference but uh huh , uh huh , ¿and do n't you want to go back to NNP ? hi , ¿how are you ? fine , ¿and you ? very well , annie , i 'm in texas , ¿where are you ? how did you find out ? you too , uh , yeah , i found out like that , ¿where in texas ? but my what ? many , many of the people are just walking by there because they have nothing to do . so then what music do you like ? yes is true , were you born in the united states ? uh , i was gon na ask you because you VBD puerto rican , and , ¿how long have you been in miami ? uh huh , ¿and you ? , no , only i moved to go to college ¿and where in puerto rico are you from ? ¿and you ? ¿and do you like it ? and where did you study ? then , who are your favorite singers ? eh i like NNP NNP , eh i like NNP NNP quite a lot . and you ? oh , what 's the name ? northern music , northern music . and what do you think about NN ? yeah , that 's why , ¿right ? oh yeah ? , i did n't know that in spanish ? , you do n't say . still ? , damn , i thought that NNP NNP already . . . and then what else did we have to talk about , oh , what is the role that music plays in your life ? but if i clean , and sometimes when i study , i play music . but most of the times only when i need to relax , right ? , when i am doing something that i ca n't do watching tv , then i listen to music but i know people who do so , and with the , what 's its name ? NNP , NN it , NNP which one ? can you remember the title of some song ? and you like it there ? VB ? ¿hello ? VB ? VB ? hi , ¿how are you ? ¿how are you ? very good , ¿and you ? ¿what 's your name ? maria , ¿and you ? well , nothing . ¿how long have you been doing this . . . this . . . ? oh , EX 's the first time ? , oh , me too oh , ¿yes ? , oh , ok ye , yes , where , ¿where are you ? in florida ? in NNP , ¿where ? , FW philadelphia ? yeah , ¿and you ? yes , yes , well , we have to talk about marriage , ¿right ? , or i NNS , yeah , because it said marriage at the beginning , but then it said , ¿what music do you like and does music play an important role in your life ? uh , lets see , ¿where are you from ? i 'm from madrid , spain , ¿and you ? yeah , ¿how did you know ? well , uh , a NN of mine that 's in the linguistics department at penn , at penn , at the university of pennsylvania , who VBZ the ones who are VBG this , ¿you know ? so , well , nothing , i do n't know , ¿do we talk about something ? and , ¿how long have you been there ? i do n't know how much , ¿do you mean the conversation ? oh , ok , ¿do you like it ? i 've been here for a year , yeah , i liked it , but i had some trouble VBG . but , well , i 'm getting used to it little by little . and , ¿how long have you been in florida ? CD years ? , oh boy and , what , what , ¿are you a graduate student or ? you 're working , VBG related to linguistics ? and , ¿how did you find out about this study ? oh my god , ¿did you , did you hear that ? yeah , me neither . well , hey maria , so , well , what , we have to talk about music , ¿right ? ok , ¿what kind of music do you like ? VB ? eh , what else do i like ? ah mm do you like the music more classical do you prefer pop music or ? eh mm let 's see , and you ? i like classical music , i like well , because i studied music . you know ? ah , really ? and it 's always , well , uh , i was raised , well , like that , studying and listening to classical music and opera and that , ¿right ? um , yes , yes , opera and such , ¿have you ever been in the opera ? NN ? , FW ? , or it 's expensive , but you can always get a NN sometime , or something , ¿you know ? there , ¿where do you live ? , ¿where exactly in florida do you live ? , in , in NNS and things about operas , and things about , ¿you know ? ¿oh yes ? but they 're such good students that the concerts are practically , i mean , more than students , professionals , ¿you know ? because they give concerts almost every day , ¿you know ? do you know , ¿do you know philadelphia ? what do you , ¿what do you know of the united states ? yes , oh , NNP , ¿did you like it ? in , ¿what else ? , california , uh sure , where would you like to go ? north carolina ? what do you want to see there ? aha , oh , i mean , so you 've been to spain ? oh , ¿yes ? it was something , ¿you know ? is horrible . however in , in miami you do n't have that problem . right ? very hot . and is very humid , right ? ah , really ? oh , really ? maybe it 's because , because they come to , they come to the united states , ¿right ? and , ¿have you been in barcelona ? what 's , for the tourist . ¿you know ? , to visit things and watch NNS and such yes , yes , yes . how long were you in spain ? sure , i still have n't had time . you know ? oh , really ? yes , there 's a japanese there 's a JJ there 's a girl from puerto rico there 's , there 's a JJ . who else ? eh , good , everything , ah , there 's , my JJ yes , yes , and what are you doing maria ? yes , and in NN to that , that 's VBG now , no ? or that 's had how are you ? fine . and you ? yesterday we talked ? i think so . you are in canada ? yes , ¿and what are we gon na talk about now ? , JJ ? yeah . VB ? do you have to pay ? where do you go ? only on NNP ? or , ¿how can i tell you ? , did you tell me `` t a '' NN ? , uh huh NN , NNP ? oh , ¿are you in ? why ? ah , what 's so bad about it ? eh , because they think that i 'm american , black american so when i speak spanish even people that speak spanish look at me and tell me , where did you learn spanish ? yeah , ¿right ? dominicans there , i mean , you see them talking and it 's just , you told me yesterday , ¿what kind of music did you like , VB ? i imagine that the , that NNS are also romantic , ¿right ? you are one of m y old friends so , the day before yesterday i talked to him and he started to talk about that , do you remember that ? singer , boy george ? do you remember it ? oh , he 's starting to sing , i remembered the song about you and i and i would laugh at him who ? when ? uh uh , really ? oh . VB ? i thought that it was only like NNS or is , or is it the whole body ? um , no , like NN white , it 's not that white , it 's white . no , white like a little dirty , ¿right ? , it 's , i do n't know , but it 's different to be VBG and specially to him , that everybody says things about him , and explain to them that he VBD his skin . CC you imagine you doing those ? i say , oh god , and afterwords when they tell you that the man had two children , i say , oh my god , i say , ¿what for ? ¿who did he have those children ? NN who ? with a woman , ¿did n't you know that ? RB ? NN was n't NNP NNP ? ¿and that was his children ? oh , how are you ? fine and you ? oh , nice to meet you . i live here in philadelphia . where are you at ? oh , just a little , not that much , how about you ? oh , have you called here before ? ah ? have you called here before ? yes , yes , they 've already , they 've already connected me with like four different people , no ? aha . and always oh , are you studying or what are you doing ? ah really , ah , with , and you live with the family ? ah they are , and you 're from puerto rico ? and you ? really ? a long time ? those NNS are very good . right ? ah , and they go by the caribbean or they go RB ? it 's a matter of paying attention or calling , ¿right ? oh my . , but at least that was it , ¿right ? and it 's leaving NN over , ¿where ? , over carolina , i think and it 's not very hot there ? hot . and there in miami , i think that it 's more , more stable , no ? and where you live is there a NN part or something ? since they have air NN everywhere , no ? and have you known philadelphia ? ah have you been in boston ? there is so cold there , right ? which part of california ? cold makes you tired right ? are you married ? are you single ? yes and you ? they are the JJS love one has right ? and they live there ? well like you need , you need right ? that , that right ? like other places , ¿right ? , yes and well , wait for things not to be so hard , ¿right ? to people , there 's people that has suffered a lot more and you have n't returned to venezuela ? eh , what is it called , where for the NN ? in the NNP ? been through it , right ? sure , right ? you get tired and you do n't go visit them . do you travel often ? oh , that 's great , always on holidays ? can you travel ? take courses or something right ? a lot of guys go there right ? a lot aha . no one stable yet right ? is all your family there ? how strange you went to miami on your own ? you have your car and move around , right ? even NN is somehow different , is n't it ? really ? and where is that at ? ah , okay , okay . are there NNS there ? and perhaps well because of that maybe with the cars yes , they do n't think that that , eh , VBZ more work . or more people appear to work , right ? and how far is it ? hello ? ¿who am i talking to ? VB where ? nice to meet you , ¿do you know what 's today 's subject ? what 's , uh , VB ? do you start , or do i ? and you ? you do n't go out to dance ? to concerts or or to NNS or something ? aha , aha , what , are you young or what ? and you ? do you have a family ? oh , where in puerto rico exactly ? oh really ? i 'm from NNP . have you been there for long ? are you not married ? yet ? are you studying ? oh , okay , what are you working on ? oh , okay , okay , okay . do you have a boyfriend ? no ? but when you had a boyfriend , did you listen to music together ? what music did he like , the same as yours ? and your mom ? does she like music also ? oh , really ? is she young ? she ? yes oh , ok , and your dad ? does he like music as well ? and your friends ? do they like hispanic music a lot ? what part of miami do you live in ? ah , okay . and you like chicago ? yes ? is not too cold ? so , um , what , ¿what else do you like about music ? do n't you like to , uh , JJ singing ? ¿you do n't ? VB the NN ? right , ha ha , and , uh , ¿do n't you like to write it either ? ¿have n't you ever written a song or something ? no ? what are you studying ? you are , what were you , what did you study ? oh , for children or for adults ? wow yes ? wow and , and but now you are working as a NN no ? and your friend also or what ? but , eh ? do you ? really ? a woman ? with the same person ? and i , i , i , ¿and what else can you tell me about music ? right , VBZ the internet ? ¿and what singers do you want ? uh , ¿who else ? who else . . . ¿do n't you like , uh , NNP ? and , and , uh , ¿do n't you like NNP NNP ? ¿and who else ? VB miguel ? and , ¿who 's more ? , uh , uh , that are , that are , like they say , VBG , uh , and , this , VB NNP ? NNP yankee ? ¿oh yes ? oh , why do they have to pay her ? but , uh , NNP NNP came , uh ? are there a lot of latins there ? hello , good afternoon , who am i talking too ? josefina in philadelphia , and what 's your name ? me too , what was your name again ? and are you , oh oh , have you made a lot of calls , have they called you a lot as part of this program ? yes oh oh oh , is this your first call ? aha , the second , when did you start ? and in the end i missed it and then i said `` why was i so dumb ? `` suddenly you thought you were going to make the calls and you did n't , ¿right ? oh , RB ? , i think it 's better that to the one who 's never there and to the one who is that the computer knows , right ? exactly yes yes yes because at the end they want to reach people , right ? yes yes yes , look , where are you from ? yes , a long time ago , where are you from ? and have you been here for long ? aha , oh well i have been here for more time , a bit more but you get used to it , right ? and you have to be , have hope , right ? although it does n't happen to a lot of people but you know , how can you know that it 's not going to happen to you , right ? sure , that 's the truth , oh my god and and what do you think about cellphone ? i did n't really understand the questions , i think it is convenient that we use them in what type of question is that ? and i really use it very little , no ? that they discuss things in public ? but how JJ are people , right ? i 'm joe , ¿what 's your name ? NNP , ¿where do you live , NNP ? here in texas , ¿and you ? and , ¿do you have one ? exactly , yes , i got sixty nine dollars , and my plan is ¿what ? , two hundred minutes , but well , is this the only phone that you use or do you have one at home too ? did you use it for work or just to call your friends ? two hundred and fifty minutes is so little , ca n't you pick a five hundred minute plan or something like that ? really ? that much ? have you already VBD other companies ? and , that is what they say . right ? but later , with the taxes , and NNS , yes , yes , right ? they put JJ NNS , that besides the minutes , is it also a charge ? so , uh , he can talk to people there just like that , well , with , uh , his cellphone and they do n't charge him , well , ¿right ? , that international , ¿right ? yes , and , well , for , ah , how do you say land line in spanish ? and , and , how is texas these days ? yes , here too , is really nice . what , what , what part of texas do you live in ? very hot . and are you from the city of NNP ? and you speak both languages ? and what was the company that you used for the cellular ? what is it called ? ah , i do n't know it . do you have mobile over there ? have , what ? yes , yes . and , mm , look at the traffic , it makes me mad , how can people drive and talk by the phone at the same time ? really ? and when i had the t mobile plane , i got familiar with it . i said , what parts of the united states did i think of being in ? and how to cover these parts ? so , i also included but , here there 's a lot , do they have VBN over there ? but , i 'm JJ with all the people here that use the cellulars wherever . and , i know , i 'm , ah , my friends , tell me , how , is it that you do n't have a cellular ? yes , is true . and even , do you remember the NNS they had that were huge ? it already looked like it was going to be , ah , that , ah how do you say it ? that a plane would come down by NN ? oh , well , no , well , oh , ¿what do they want ? well , so , ¿what do you think about cellphones ? oh , i like them , but , NNP ? ¿you do n't ? why be paying ? and talk with someone ? it 's impossible , just driving with one hand , right ? oh , really ? for a week and i was laughing at my NNS because , my boss he was like , hey could we give you a satellite phone , just in case ? but , they are always looking for you to give you more work , why do n't you have a cellphone ? and he 's like , what for ? so that you can call me at night when i 'm driving home just to ask me something ? no . yes , me too . i also called my sister in , and she was in the car , and ah , i call you , the other one said , no , no , no , i said , where are you ? the NN . yes she called me there , that do you know , can you give me the NN ? as if i had the NN in my head , woman . and what does he eat then , NN ? so it is . well , i make my rice , i tell him , i know you don´t like rice , but today i will make rice , and i say , what do you want with your meat or something like that ? and , my little one is who wants now , changing the NN , is , ah ? little one , is he fifteen ? how old is the little one ? yes , he , he , exactly , that 's what he said , no , sir . i tell him , no , man . for what ? so that you 're in school talking on the cellular phone when you do n't need to ? ah ? uh , no , that it 's free , i think , no , no , no , there it is , i think , i do n't have a cellphone , ¿why would i give one to you ? i was watching there once , ¿where was i ? , i was at the mall and , uh , i was in front of a mcdonald 's here , VBP the mall ¿how was that ? and they did n't even realize it ? and , no , did they realize that he was taking pictures . i say , why do they have ? but , no , that of the phone , i say , for what ? ¿what do you do ? , the six year old girl with a cellphone i say , that 's a lie , ¿who 's she gon na call ? NN ? ¿who 's she gon na call ? , i say , ¿who ? i say , PRP$ grandmother ? , she 's calling her mom hi , ¿what 's your name ? my name is annie , ¿and yours ? '' 'm sorry ? ¿how are you ? ¿how are you ? , very good and you ? fine , hey , where , ¿where are you ? ¿you 're in miami too ? yeah , well , ¿where are you from ? yeah , i mean , you 've practically lived here your whole life , ¿right ? ¿and you ? , oh , wow yeah , i 'm from madrid , besides , yeah , well , i 'm on the bus , JJ you hear me well ? well , we have to talk about mobile phones , ¿right ? , well , cellphones once again , ¿what did you say ? , i did n't hear you , i 'm sorry ¿hello ? , no , that i , uh , i love to use the cellphone , i 'm completely VBN to the cellphone more than here , people do n't use them much here , ¿right ? oh , and , ¿is she very little ? oh , that 's nice , that 's nice , and , ¿is it your first daughter ? ¿is it your first child ? ¿you 're having another ? you must be so excited about your girl , ¿right ? i can imagine that to you , it 's even more than that , right ? were you working outside of the house before or ? yeah and , anyway , i imagine that also with your daughter you could n't now either , no ? work i am happy , yes i am happy , you have told me , she is twenty months old does she VB ? right ? oh , what a happiness what a happiness , well . wait until she begins to touch everything and you will need to be very aware of everything that she doesn´t find any danger and that stuff right ? normal , that 's logical , and what 's her name ? my friend NNP , i 'm so happy for your girl . NNP is she , is she very . . ? is she good ? does she eat well ? and VB a lot ? yes , yes , and what are you doing here in the united states ? sorry ? he brought it . what do you do here in the united states ? and how much do you have left ? do you know new york or philadelphia ? did i speak with you the other night ? they 're talking about cell phones , right ? or hospitals , if you go to a hospital , how are going to have the phone on ? i called and i said from my house i called him and i said , where are you ? in my house but i 'm going to go out and we VBD and we called her another time and we said , where are you ? and she said , i went out to a party the cell phone is also good because when you go shopping and you have someone at home you can call and ask , what do you need ? or what do n't we need ? hello ? hello ? yes , who 's speaking ? what did they do before the cellular phones ? one looks at them , they look at you bad like , what are you listening to ? and , no , but , they , who are speaking , in a loud voice , are saying , for someone to come and take the right ? mhm , mhm . and , for instance , what do you think about ? the other question is . let 's say , people that VBZ while ¿right ? , for i have to drive . not , not both at the same time . and afterwords , if the person NNS , ¿what , what are they going to do ? , ¿you know ? , they do n't , they do n't think the other thing that i , well , what i said , but there 's always a benefit in having , having a cellphone . although , as you say , right ? , uh what would you do , what did we do before that we ca n't almost live , without the cellphone , ¿right ? for being without , without the cellular , right ? but , ah , and , then , now is with the , with the , how do you say it ? the , the , VBZ that the phones have , that they have some NNS , and they have music , and they have that can be eh , how is it ? dangerous . right ? the technology . so , do you think there should be a rule , or maybe , a state wide NN , a law for all the states , in which talking on the cellphone should be VBN or that you are VBN to use an NN ? hello ? how are you ? very good , very good . and what 's your name ? norma ? my name is miguel angel . well norma , where do you live , where are you at ? aha , and , where are you from ? ah , from peru ? aha , aha . yes well nothing norma , we have to talk about cellular phones , right ? and , and what do you think ? ah , really ? mm . yes . and well , really , it 's necessary nowadays , right ? having a cellular is necessary and although it can , sometimes , in mm , yes , but it 's JJ , right ? because , for example , you find yourself in an emergency and you do n't have , there 's no phone you know what happens ? that those things create the necessity , because when mobile phones did n't exist nobody had the need for them , you know ? uh um . oh , yeah , that 's also true , ¿right ? it 's a , i know , i recognize it 's a JJ need , ¿you know ? yeah , it 's a NN , uh , and that , it 's that we live in a NN society , ¿right ? , so ¿right ? , and it 's real , really no , because before , like you say , before we did n't have , ¿right ? , the cellphone , or ¿right ? , so uh , no , we lived without computers they 're , it 's just that , they 're necessary for living , right ? well it seems , and well nothing happened , and now you say , oh my NN , how can i survive without the internet ? you know ? society , right ? the to see if NNP , NNP have answered me , you know ? you 're always VBG about your email . and , and , uh , before you did n't notice it was n't there , before , you know ? yes , eh , or , i mean , it has its advantages and NNS , right ? you know ? or , for example , during emergencies . is there , is there an accident or anything and then you can tell , do you know ? this is , mmm , it is yes , this one , this one yes , this is very clear , in reality no ? yes this , yes , what happened was clear . how many times , RB , you 're missing the phone for emergencies ? not many . many times too , many times too right ? when the people are very distracted talking at the phone , or at the cell , how do you call it , many times accidents happen no ? because the people that care more , they get more excited at the phone , about news or who they 're talking to and NNS and they can cause accidents too , no ? yes , yes i saw , no ? it 's true , many people are here at the phone and driving , no ? to the . . . yeah , well , now , ¿right ? , we 're , like i told you , a city of NN in everything it 's true , and , and it 's the same , ¿is it the same in peru too ? , the , the cellphones , everyone 's got the NN ¿have you been in the united states for ten years without going back to peru ? but , ok , ¿and why is that ? not even for christmas ? or no , i always , well , i get in touch with the family , ¿right ? , with my mom and my brothers , but in the end NN ? , yeah , but no , but you have n't seen them in ten years oh NN , that 's sad , ¿is n't it ? ¿do n't you want to go ? , VBP n't you want to go ? well , i would like to go , ¿right ? , but it 's ok , and no oh NN . that 's hard , ¿is n't it ? , ten years , oh NN i have been here for a year and i already want to go see my family a bit , and , because i have , i live here , but , well , but i would like to , ¿right ? , and see them and that , ¿right ? sure . ¿do you have a wife and children ? sorry ? ¿do you have a wife and children ? no , ¿do , do , uh , do i have children ? yeah , or a wife ? and , and my grandmother , poor soul she 's very sick now , you know ? and she 's already very old , she 's eighty nine years old . and they tell me , how are you ? i do n't know what , are you working ? such , and well they call me , now is a little more rare , because you know there are six hours difference with spain . sometimes they call me at some strange hours , but well . and , but my grandmother is doing really bad now . you know ? she 's very sick and we believe we don we do n't think she will get through it . you know ? yes , yes she 's eighty nine years old . you know ? NNS , or pain , or anything . you know ? you know ? NNS . sure , sure . but well , it seems that it seems that she could say enough . you know ? i do n't know , ¿you know ? . man , i had the idea that maybe it was the last time i saw her , ¿you know ? yeah , well , that 's really what you see around you , a lot of people , i mean , ¿right ? , they VBP their body , they die do have grandparents , do you have grand parents , parents , norma ? well , i have my mom and my sisters , ¿right ? , in peru no , my , my , my relatives , ¿right ? , my ¿right ? , my uncles but is always hard . you know ? of course , always , one has that NN , right ? family relationships , and one always , always feels , right ? because they were , my grandparents on my mother 's side have always been very close . you know ? we 've always had them really close to us , with us , and , you know ? so then , well is a stronger relationship . but well , look , i do n't know , that 's how things are . you know ? well , that happens , well no , this world nothing is forever in this material world , right ? there are always JJ things in spain , television did n't exist when they were born , you know ? and look at all the changes that have happened during his NN , you know ? the , the , eh , they 've VBN so many changes during their lives . they 'd let me , many people , no ? that are , eh , that are older think that the life they had before was better than this one that 's right , well look , no ? they went from not having a television , yes , because it did n't exist , no television , no phones , well phones there might have been phones already but very few , you know ? and well , i mean , because i am thirty years old , ¿you know ? , but so no , but it 's true , so , ¿and do you have , do you have children , do you have children ? oh , of course , of course , ¿do you work outside home too ? ah , yes , is hard , right ? because one is the whole time with the kids . hi , yes good evening , who am i talking to ? yes , cell phones , yes , really ? and first she told me MD at three o'clock ' , but then she called me and told me to go at four , and i told her , '' know what ? i will come at five o'clock , and if you call again i wo n't come at NN which ones ? oh , aha , aha , absolutely i do n't know that district , NNP ? oh , no , i do n't know long island yes , in long island , oh , you do n't know long island ? where in pennsylvania do you live in ? oh , ok , and you are puerto rican , are n't you ? no , i 'm cuban , yes , so you are puerto rican ? oh that 's cool , mhm yes , oh , you do ? ah , that happened in last year 's study ? really ? i think i remember now , but , you are not doing it now are you ? you know , you are home and , what do you do during the day , do you have a job ? oh , yeah ? oh , oh , okay , oh , house NN ? sorry ? NN , NN house NN ? no what , what 's a NN , oh NN , okay , okay , i see . oh , oh , that 's nice , yeah yes thanks , and and so , IN the cell phone , do you usually charge it or almost never charge it ? you ca n't say that , ¿right ? , oh , there is a cop coming , i better hang up , yeah yeah , yeah , and , and he was JJ when we got there , ¿why did you hang up on me ? , and she said `` because there was a cop '' , and she said `` ¿is n't it true ? `` , and i said yeah a cop , and they give her a ticket ¿right ? , and she uses that ear thing , he says , but she had that ear thing , she could n't hear you at what NN will you come back ? when will you come back ? when eh ? and my , my , my partner as a clown also talks a lot , a lot on the phone ah how funny , yea , yes , that was at your church ? ah , yes , ah , uh , what do you do there ? uh huh , and in , and what part of new york are you in ? ah , yea and , what are how are the public high schools in long island ? bad ? ah , texas ? what 's the weather like down there ? sorry ? what 's the weather like down there ? ah , yes , eh , well it 's almost summer not here , and you , what 's your name ? ah , david , and you are ? in ah , NNP and what 's the weather like there ? ah , yes , but is it getting worse or is it getting more or less ? ah , really ? yes , i know , but yes , the people from texas but there are a lot of hispanics down there , right ? they are black , right ? really ? yes , because how one , one felt like before it was different , right ? now it 's going to be , it starts changing for the good mm , how do you feel about that ? no , you do n't know ? and , and , and , where , where are you from ? and why do you speak spanish ? ah , but you speak spanish very well , how long did you have to study it ? yes , really ? do use a cellular phone ? ah , really ? if they give the NN calls free is , it comes out JJ right ? because one pays more or less like sixty dollars a month and can use the phone however they round out the minute , right ? yes and other companies also charge the NN , right ? the calls that come in . ah , yes ? t mobile ? and in exchange , does NNP have good NN ? does sprint work well ? to control the use of cell phones when people are driving ? if you , say , have an accident , they will ask , oh , cell phone ? they will say that you can't uh , yea it 's , it 's the law now ? i did n't know that it was an approved law i say , it 's always very JJ and all , but it 's true eh , that you have to have money to buy them , no ? and afterwards , well , then you have to maintain it , because also the NNS are minimum of one year , right ? you want a change , no ? and , and well , does sprint have this , of the , eh , mm , like t mobile has for family members , that you can talk JJ NNS , or not ? hmm . what part of mexico are you from ? oh , yeah ? mexico city hello ? hello , do you speak spanish ? ah , how are you ? good , and you ? good . what 's your name ? um . what do you think of cell phones ? do you have one ? and you ? ah . and where did you live ? and you ? in florida and there , people have , everybody has a cellphone , is n't it ? but , that long , people , seven years ago they were n't so popular , right ? mm , and what do you think of the people that use them while in the streets and , eh ? eh ? that i know it 's dangerous . and what do you think about what they say ? that the NN might be bad ? of the phones . do you think is bad ? mm . i have n't heard much of that . i do n't know . i hope not . what do they say ? and it 's not known if it 's safe . right ? and . what else can we talk about ? and where are you from ? what part ? are you from the united states or ? and you 've called here a lot ? what was i going to tell you . have you heard the phones ? have you heard the new phones that have come out now ? is that high fashion in the united NNP or ? and do you want to have one of those or not ? you do n't use the internet much ? but you would n't use this telephone ? yes . huh ? you would n't use this telephone ? it 's pretty small , right ? or yeah , than speaking ? and this is good money . so , eh , are you there ? what are you going to do with a mobile or what ? is it still expensive there ? they already like it , right ? is it still expensive talking on the phone there ? yes . and what do you think of the people the people that are on the streets that have NNS , they do n't carry the phone ? have you seen them ? you do n't like that , why not ? eh , okay . and , what model phone do you have ? ah , um . and , is it small ? why ? ah . ah . mm . and what does your phone have , does it have a camera ? and you have NNS and that , a lot ? and does it seem like people who have NNS are that rare ? uh huh . oh yeah ? oh yeah ? oh , really ? NNP , or the sound of an old telephone , a ring ring telephone like the JJ ones , right ? yes . oh , what else did you want to talk about ? oh yeah ? hello ? oh , yes , this is alex , i live in los angeles , who is that ? this is NNP , i live in seattle , alex , have n't we talked before ? aha , about the salsa , aha , i VBD your voice , so , what do you think about cellular phones ? to a gas station to call on , on a public phone or a free NN or VBG you understand me ? , the JJ truck and i said , you have to pay this contract and i said , who will pay it , you , how you talk but you do n't notice ? i say , i 'm going to have more NNS they asked you for a contract ? hmm ah , yes , i said , no , no i do n't want this , and i said to him , what for ? for when you 're at school and talking on the telephone ? no use the , the , what 's it called ? the NN NN oh , really ? and , and , i thought , what the hell do these students need the phones for ? yes , that 's what they are saying , that this is happening in junior high and in college , it 's like you know ? the camera , you can watch movies , it 's like , i mean a video i mean , that 's what i 'm talking about , why do you want , why do you fight for a phone if you do n't need one during classes ? you are supposed to be paying attention . i mean , what do you do , i tell them , who are you calling , NNP , who ? grandma ? well , NN , VB your mother 's phone ah , nice to meet you , how are you ? same . fine , and you ? ah . fine thanks . my name is josefina in philadelphia . and you ? ah , a pleasure , have you been already several eh weeks with this plan or are you starting ? hello ? hello ? ah , okay , i was there with my dad and the tv is on . and then this man , about some topic i don´t but sometimes you , how do you say it ? repeat yourself over and over again , i don´t know ah , cell phone , right ? people tried to hide in a phone NN or something , no ? to not be heard , right ? i at least drive , but i VBP over each time the cellphone rings , when i can , right ? but that 's is , right ? we think about other things , and we should be more JJ . do you drive ? oh , you do n't use the cell phone either ? a work where i had to attend calls , emergency calls from children , right ? . when i worked with children i do n't know , do you work ? things , right ? and so i tried to look for her and when i called work they told me no , leticia died last week , and i said , what ? my goodness , how awful , this was over there in puerto rico ? how long you will have this chance , right ? no one is perfect , right ? no ? JJR and quickly to school , and it VBZ me because sometimes i would like to spend more time with them , right ? but i was always working i was always in a NN . i think my mom took more care of him than myself . but this is something you learn afterwards , is n't it ? VBG all the time , yes , we talk after and i 'll tell you . and have you been here in georgia for a long time ? in the state ? how good , did you graduate ? wow look and the hurricane did n't affect you ? mm , how nice and did you guys get a lot of people from there also ? the ones that were going to other states ? all possible . ah , and is the climate always like that like miami ? hot ? but it does n't snow ? hello ? ah , how are you ? what 's your name ? JJ junior . whom am i speaking with ? sorry ? with whom am i speaking ? junior . how are you ? fine , and you ? where are you from ? from maryland ? oh , how old are you ? oh . and you live in spain ? oh , good , what part of new york ? we have to talk about mobile phones , yeah , ¿right ? ¿do you , do you have a cell phone ? UH ? ¿what 's that about the ? NN ? , i do n't know that VBZ a what ? oh , those are bigger , right ? and how NN have you had that cellphone ? that long ? since you had CD years old ? and , have you had a cellphone for a long time ? or you do n't have one ? yea , where in new york are you ? ah , really ? ah well i well i 'm not familiar with it , do you have to pay for the phone , or no ? uh huh . and what do you do here in new york ? they had songs , they had rare songs , here they do n't have much of this , no ? eh ? what do you do there in new york , work , go to school or what ? oh , you 're a student ? where ? yes well i 'm seeing whether i do it or not . you live in the NN room today ? what ? do you live in school or do you have an apartment ? or what ? oh , like you sleep with another person ? you do n't sleep with them ? oh , and you pay it all the two of you ? oh , and how is going at school ? what is he studying ? oh , we could also talk about , about , what we think about these NNS that VBP talking by phone on the car , while driving , here you can talk while you drive , ca n't you ? you ca n't ? what ? and , do you know how many car accidents i have seen caused by talking on the phone ? yes but we , how do you say i 'm like this ? i do n't look for noise but if there 's someone , we catch him VBZ we send him outside do you speak english ? english is better ? hello ? hello ? so so , you were born here then , no ? do you consider yourself to be puerto rican or from the united states ? from puerto rico , surely . and what languages do you speak ? oh , but you 're from spain , right ? and the father went to ? huh ? i do n't know either but since she 's older like ninety three and the rest of your family , they 're all from puerto rico ? yes ? and you do n't think about what you will do if you do n't get into the police in the end ? of what ? yes ? a restaurant or a JJ ? like what ? hello hello eh whom am i speaking with ? yes , how did you say , what 's your name ? and how are you ? yes where are you from ? yes and you ? and and where do you live ? ah in philadelphia , and what do you think of the university there ? how good , ehh , so , i do n't know , what do you think about cellular phones ? to be too what ? and have you been teaching for many years ? of course , of course very good and and in cuba , can you go to cuba or visit ? and the other he was telling me all well that he returned very VBN in other words on one side on how beautiful it was and on the other on how much there 's VBG right ? material things right ? what 's VBG what ? are you teaching class to the kids tomorrow also ? and do they also take NNS take cellular to class yes ? yes well , this happens even at the university , no ? that people should , i do n't know hmm , turn it off ? even though well , sometimes it 's really easy to forget it , no ? this happened to me in spain when the train is more annoying than two people speaking normal , right ? i mean when hello ? how are you ? good , and you ? we spoke before , right ? aha . now we have to talk about cell phones . do you have a cell phone ? me too . and you drive ? in what ? i told him , are you crazy ? well , eh , it came out free right ? the minutes that the cellular has , that can be used in any part of the united states , then , when you call there , from here , is it like if you are calling abroad ? do you get charged for long distance ? and , you 're in texas , right ? yes ? i , sometimes think , how would i do it ? like the old people , you see them , and they do n't carry them . oh , really ? really ? because i , since i put my , eh , ah , in the house , and the cell phone numbers . and after about a month and a half , i never received another call . hello ? hello , how is it going ? how are you ? mercedes ' speaking . i do n't know what about dating , dating . what 's that ? what was it telling you ? VBG . could it be VBG how ? really ? i imagine is like online dating . right ? well , let 's see , have you ever , ever , did blind dating , or , or over the internet ? me neither . oh really ? and , why did they look on the internet , or , or how ? yes . and , that , eh , i have known people that in the same city , right ? they got to know each other that way . ah , yes . and did they end up together ? i , maybe , like i said before , eh , what did i said ? to know the person . because , it is a good , is another way of meeting people . but , yes , is like to know somebody at a bar , really , you don´t know that person , and you meet him , and you start to talk . right ? i don´t think so , i am never going to need to use it . eh , are you single right ? no . ah , are you married too ? maybe , ah , no . i don´t think i , i don´t think i would use it . well , at first , i will not have the need here , what 's in , is something called NN dating , have you heard about NN dating ? and this one they are going to VB would only be for spaniards ? mm . two thing about that . one , i find it like very VBG , right ? well , yes . pressure on , saying the right NN , right ? in those two minutes , and give a good impression . and the other you get depressed , yes , that 's right . but , what actually happens is that men note down all of the women , right ? then , it 's enough if one women VBZ him i do n't know , if i say that these new ways of , these , i mean , via e mail and things like this , it 's not that new , right ? but this NN dating , really ? because , well , i tell you , it 's like a game , right ? . the idea is not getting a date , i do n't need a date right now what do you think of that ? i do n't know . the truth , eh , because , in theory , is not very different to all this . right ? but , i 've always had a little bit of NN for those ads . and , that 's why i say , in theory , is the same as by the internet . right ? because , yes , let 's say , in match dot com , basically , how many times they say , i 'm looking for a woman , but i 'm like this and like that , right ? yes . eh , yes , eh , and it 's also , hmm , the , the other too , the other NN , also , was in the chat rooms . right ? no ? also , another , also , that i use a lot , is NNP . i do n't know if any , and i 've also seen that it also has , eh , like it has NNS , right ? , where they put , hello ? did you understand today 's subject ? other people do , i know it may work , because i 've heard of many cases in which it did work , you know what i mean ? they have to pay for all the expenses , airport taxes , NN , all that , and they get women , and most of them are very happy with the women because it 's said that JJ women are very , how is it ? very JJ to her man that it has been used by many people to be , how you call it ? , to be JJ to their partner the conversations they hold with other women , so , i think it 's JJ for many things . you know what i mean ? i myself , find it very JJ oh , let 's see , how would i say this ? , the last in personal relation , because has a lot of , yes exactly no , no , how is it ? , and after , people is saying , i 'm bored , i 'm bored but they don anything , sitting all day in front of a computer aha , aha , yes , there twenty thousand NNS and you think it is a kind of person , how can i tell you ? i have a friend of mine that the guy took everything she had , she even lost her house he took all she had . and she ca n't do anything because she had already signed , and everything was on his name . what can she do ? nothing , she could n't do nothing ah hi , how are you ? fine my name is josefina , i 'm in philadelphia , where are you ? but , well , here we are . how are you , good ? eh happy with the program ? in calling . and i see that , that also i did n't even understand the first word today . what 's , what is the topic , he said , calls ? yes , listen josefina , and tell me then you 're in philadelphia and what , are you , do you study or work , in , in penn ? but where were you born , over there , i believe in europe right ? yes ah really ? you 've been you 've been already fifteen years sixteen years right ? but , how did you get the american nationality ? been without going to venezuela ? wow , you do n't miss it ? you do n't have family there ? and you spoke english or no ? oh , and spain , which part are you from , madrid ? ah yes . how many years ago were you in madrid ? ah , like NN before coming here , about twenty years ago ? but yes , you liked it ? they they did n't let me look , and , and when do you finish your school ? really ? well ah , well take down mine . do you have a NN ? aha , but i thought i heard you mentioned your cellphone , no ? to the cellphone ? but it 's two fifteen right ? i do n't know , anyways , do you use the internet ? they still are going out even if they stay there , true ? are you going to go during christmas or something like that ? that 's nice , ¿and did you celebrate it the european way ? oh really ? yes , who am i talking to ? eh , michael and who is this ? eh , i 'm silvia , i 'm in philadelphia and you ? yes , eh , which is the , which is the ? they should speak a better spanish , do n't you think ? really ? but i 've talked to some men who have told me that they have used it and , those services and i tell them and why ? um , and what do you do in philadelphia ? yes , i stayed . are you at penn ? ah nice , and what country are you from ? from cuba , how nice , and what do you think about the situation that 's in cuba now ? ah , i 'm not in favor of this , i would like to be , i would like to be in cuba , and you , what country are your mom and dad from ? how are you ? eh , good and you ? i want to put to sleep . where are you calling from ? from where are you calling ? what ? i 'm in new york . and you ? and ah , you know that i did n't understand too much what the topic was about . did you understand it ? of what ? and where are you from ? ah , i 'm peruvian , and you ? what ? no . and how is it for you , what do you think ? where are you going to find them then , in a bar ? a bar is n't , it 's not a good place to meet people either , above all they 're drunk and , ¿and are you married or single ? two girls , ¿what , what ages ? are they sleeping now or not yet ? what thing ? but well they learn that way , one way or another they learn . and how long have you been married ? oh , i 'm joe , ¿what 's your name ? nice to meet you , ¿where are you from ? ¿you live in denver ? , that 's good yes , i live here in denver , and well , uh , the subject is , it 's about the internet , ¿right ? , about how you connect , how you go , like that , meeting people WDT was the subject ? , it VBZ oh , ok , well , no , try , try to , like that , well , like my friends or something , over , over the e mail , ¿right ? , well , yes , i talk to them , but like getting someone you can go out with , no , ¿right ? , i have never , uh , done anything like that , ¿have you ? oh , yes , no , yes , that 's why i have never , uh , tried to do it like that , ¿right ? yes , yes . like that is good . right ? and you enter , well , international chat rooms , or spanish ones , or how do you do it ? but it makes me feel , it makes me feel like i 'm still closed to the island . right ? and were you born there in NNP ? are you from , from , from puerto , puerto rico , or what ? and have you gone back to , to , well , to know or to visit ? yes , yes , that she gets to know it all , right ? so then , do you have many , do you have many friends in many parts of the world via the internet ? yes , as well . right ? ah , yes , or spain . right ? spanish . yes , by , by new york and philadelphia , no ? places like this . but , no , you see one , sometimes the stores here , and hey , a lot of people speaking spanish . and what internet service do you use ? ah , if i use the internet ? yes , for , for studying , because i 'm , i 'm a student now . and , you study , you take your classes on the internet ? NNS and , sorry ? you look , you take your classes on the internet , or you find NNS on the internet ? what is your work ? and what do you do or are you just a student ? and is there a lot of demand there in , in NNP , or in new mexico ? um , well , yes , yes , well , all that of , of JJ food , and well , being healthy . things like that . right ? we do n't have much time left for , how long ? ah , they give us like six , or like , how much is it , ah ? oh , is it the first time ? hold on , let me just make sure hey , come here , you . i think your phone is all VBG up . hello ? what are you doing ? plant hello , hello , who am i talking too ? silvia , from new york , is that you ? where do you live junior ? eh , i 'm in philadelphia ah , philadelphia , how old are you ? hello , oh , how old are you ? how old ? why do you want to know my age ? ah well , do you believe that ? well , what do you think about this ? ah , you tried it ? how 's that ? NN , yeah , the relationship ended ahh and , and you have a daughter together ? how old is the girl ? hmm , what 's her name ? what 's the girl 's name ? she 's from , what was the best solution for you ? yes , because dating does n't mean this , right ? what does dating mean ? mhm , how did you find out about this survey ? aha and how often do they do this because i knew of one a year and a half ago around there but that was the only one i 've known of . how often do they do this study ? that 's the only one i knew of , have there been others then ? since then ? uh um , ¿and what office do you call later to ask about that ? let me write it down , VB ? , eight ok , ok , yeah i will call there to have them consider me , yeah , ¿and how long will this study last ? NNS have what mixed ? oh , ¿and you can sign up to do the spanish and the english one too ? '' the computer , how ? to meet and to go out , how are they changing relationships ? , ¿how does the NNS between men and women change ? i am JJ sure , ¿and you ? how are you ? where are you calling from ? ah ah i 'm here in arizona . and you ? where are you ? oh yes good well , is spanish your first language ? are you going to school for that ? what about you ? ah , today 's subject , ah , i have never done that , online dating , what about you ? have you VBN that ? have you ? me either . but i know of what ? do you have a computer in the house ? i 've seen oh , just recently , i 've seen lots of ads of an internet service called NNP dot com , have you seen them ? arizona but that´s near colorado , right ? oh , did you like it ? hello ? hello ? who is this ? let 's see , what was your worst date with someone ? and when one goes to see him , is like , ah , my god , why did i come ? but , yes , and , and , also and has it ever happened to you that you go out with someone , to a restaurant , and at the end it does n't work out ? and at the end not so cute ? mm . and , but you say you met your husband through NNP ? without knowing each other , right ? and , we talked ah , what ? in the NNP a lot , and then we VBD phone numbers . but you were , you were in the same city ? peru , places like that , right ? ah , good , right ? NNP , NN dating ? oh . really ? is two minutes . right ? eh , what impression can one get ? just , eh , physical . but , lets say , uh , if you like this boy , oh , and , and , and you like him , you can tell in two minutes , you can ask him ¿do you smoke or not ? ¿do you drink or not ? , uh , ¿what else , what else ? , oh , i think you need to have a list of questions for two minutes , ¿right ? , and from there , if you like his answers , uh , so you have to ask his phone number or someone else , ¿right ? , i do n't understand , ¿how do you do that ? yes , and that 's another thing , well , that , the chance that they both like each other at the same time . right ? yes . i agree . it seems yes , and , and you ? no , no . i have n't . mm , no , i do n't think so . someone who was dangerous ? no . mm . yes , it can be dangerous , and more let 's say , one like this , right ? by internet , one thinks that perhaps you 're talking with , you never know . that 's why , little by little , right ? or how about when they tell you i 'm this weight , and this NN ? NNP they VBP you down and they put you in back of the NN , you know , that you 're going to be VBN back there ? for this my mom said , no . no , better not . let 's get out of here , and i went with my NN and everything . my dad did n't know anything , or my brother , or my mother . right ? but , lucky that you mom was with you . because , what if ? well , you never know , sometimes , right ? maybe the NN , or maybe not . i was talking with him for a long time , i know that he would n't do anything to me . right ? yes right ? she said , no , no . you know what ? better not , better not . we 'll find another there , or something like this . but better to go , you do n't know what he will to do you . ah , good evening , how are you ? how are you ? i 'm josefina in philadelphia , and you ? yes but well it 's good , we have a lot of people from all over , no ? aha yes , they keep VBG , no ? aha , and how are you ? what do you think about internet dating or well , i , hmm , i think that , you only meet a few good people , no ? since the year two thousand one i started to meet some people and we still have n't sent each other mail , right ? have you tried it too ? well , i do n't know if , hello , are the kids there ? ah , they 're already school age . how old are they ? ah , they 're already big , well at the , to the , a girl or boy who 's seven ? yes , there are many people who are , are interested , no ? VBZ no , some advantages , no ? because many times you meet people who are really , really JJ and yes , many times , no ? especially , and if you 're already . and you 're already more or less alone , no ? and you have conversations and all of that , at all times during the day , right ? i , i 'm in touch with , i mean , with my friends too , right ? yes , and do you study or are you at home ? ah , do you go to school ? what do you say ? no no , no , i , i i joined a NN society . no ? and and i , no , i did n't go to school , i did n't finish a degree , i joined the temple . you should look for a job , very serious , no ? here in georgia ? so much snow in winter right ? ah , and there 's no NN now with that hurricane that 's coming by there ? hey but this is , i do n't know what religions say about it , i saw , i do n't know anything , i believe that everybody is VBG for all those people , right ? yes , here , well i believe many cities did it , right ? they went from new orleans so , there are lots of people , but some are still open , right ? the red cross is sure , it was really , it was JJ , it was such a big NN , right ? lots of people died , the city VBP down completely , right ? yes , well , really , that makes us realize that our material NNS , our lives are JJ , is n't it ? we really don't and one should instead focus on family , right ? this is true . and you go ? your husband is from there or he 's american ? ah , okay . and since when have you stopped going to peru ? yes , ah , and your family is here ? aye , how great . they 're real , they sell them the whole year ? here they only sell them in a certain season . well yes , most of the time . no ? when it 's the season . and have you been called often , from this program ? yes , i mean , since it started i 've been called everyday , right ? and sometimes oh , you find the message in the machine , right ? and i did n't notice , because since i was doing another thing i did n't notice , but then it got fixed , to my schedule , right ? yes , i think that at this time , most of the people is at home . well , although there are time differences , right ? between cities , when it is do you have a central to call there ? oh ? i still had n't spoken to anyone from los angeles , from this side because it seems to me that they mostly call people from the other side , is n't it ? aha ? did you have blind dates ? NNP , it has n't happened but , if not we got to see my house , for example , no ? place if you want to come by and and we get to know each other , and like that , no , no , no , meet i did n't meet bad people , just as well it was very serious people , no ? you 're very young right ? you have the voice of a young girl it ca n't be , really ? how funny , this made you laugh , right ? NNP , is your dad there ? how funny , that 's good and aye , god . well i do n't know , they come i 'm carmen , from chicago , and you ? oh yes ? look we 're lucky look , do you know the , the uh , the , today 's thing ? wow , she did n't know who he was ? but , but you did n't look into um , um , his background or something , you did n't ask someone how he was , who he was or anything ? yes , but she VBZ you , does n't he ? NNP hi i 'm nicole , how are you ? fine thank you , where are you from ? and where are you from ? eh , i do n't know , i do n't remember , i do n't think so , of did i ? what country are you from ? ah , yes maybe we did talk how are you ? and so , things like that , no , no partners on the internet . have you used the internet for a partner ? yes ? and how , how ? so how are your experiences when you meet the person you have been talking to ? or your husband ? yes , she only went out with them , i mean , she says she did n't want a , how you call it ? she did n't want a serious relationship with a man to be with him , she just wanted to if you like that , i have seen the , how you call it ? , the NNS looking for couple hello , whom am i speaking with ? ah , mayra , my name is silvia . where are you from , mayra ? ah . really ? where ? ah , really ? ah , look at that and , ? what year is your son in ? why ? and how are you ? listen , and how did you find out about this program ? ah , okay , so he 's also doing it , or no ? and , and how is that you 're studying , um , such a hard career like chemical engineering ? oh , really ? yes , and how much is chemistry and how much is engineering in that degree ? that are used , instead of JJ engineering , for instance , that are studying NN , right ? seriously ? ah , okay . so , you 're good . i went to , how does he like it ? i went to NNP . those were my two options , penn or NNP . no , is too much already . right ? ah , really ? sometimes , a terrible NN of time , so , how can they not want to do more things , or how can they be so happy doing so little ? and in exchange here , we do a lot , and if we have free time we want to do more yes , and aside from this , what do you think of philadelphia ? like which ? yes , right ? yes , yes , mayra , what is your NN ? aha and how about you ? how many years have you been living in philadelphia ? and before , where did you live ? yes , it 's true . and do you like philadelphia ? hello , good evening ? oh , miami okay , how are you ? fine fine , and you ? ah aha . do you already have several calls that you 've made in this program ? right . oh , well , i do n't know , i think a while ago you kinda payed more attention to that , ¿right ? around there ? for example , from school or stuff like that , right ? and you ? but you 're single or married or ? and you ? yes , have you VBP there many years ? i got married , then we returned . we 've been here now almost JJ maybe , like thirteen years ? ah . and did you get married in puerto rico , or there ? NNP , do you have any children ? oh , look how nice . will it be a boy or a girl , do you know ? ah ? so cute . they are VBN to their mothers , right ? it changed , it changed your mind a bit , no ? yes . ah yes ? yes the clothes , and bed , and all that . hm it was something that , it did n't matter which color it was . yes , and , and it 's true , one ca n't , one ca n't whenever it needs , you know , for the parents is more important for the bedroom to look nice , whatever . the baby does n't need any of that . so yes and NN and care . also , is it really hot there ? now ? yes , it is . usually it is a bit cool lets say , in december , it can be in january , a bit cool but i want to say that we have around seventy degrees , around seventy ? that 's nice , yes . you know , but it 's more than that , no . oh okay , have you been here in philadelphia ? and we too , hm hmm . never . i 've never seen the snow either . oh , oh , boy . look at that . did you go to the university ? oh , that 's cool . you did n't go to work today , right ? and is free on tuesday and wednesday . and what happened to us ? that for a whole year i did n't see him and he did n't see me , because so sure . a couple must be in contact , close contact and communication yes , so ah you know , it was a little hard but , you know , and specially living here , it is very expensive , very expensive ye yes are you in miami ? no , i 'm the south , i 'm in NNP oh that it 's more south of miami , before getting in the NNS oh , okay , okay but , many people does not know , you know , where is NNP , so , we always say it 's miami , but the difference , let 's say , we are from CD or CD miles to the south of downtown miami , but mmm you never realize that you are from one city to another , let 's say , because it's you have everything there , with buildings and houses and house , and NNS , and you never realize that NNP like you were inside miami yes , yes all the time , is miami NNP , is it near ? it would be , at the north from where we are , miami NNP would be like CD miles from here oh , okay , well , i do n't know , i have been in miami , but i went as a tourist and well , then yes you are always in the downtown , or in a beach yes miami beach , but it 's CC there then , no ? eh , not too much . for this reason i wanted to go to another place , because , we have a lot , eh i do n't want to say mexicans , but that is what we have . and this is not important , but they are a lot of the people that work with , in hm in , ay ay ay in the country yes , and for this reason there is a lot not much NN , but , but , it is not a hm , ah yes it is not very VB a lot , yes , the population is big one second ah , but good , little by little truth permit me , yes yes , god would like , we yes , little by little we are going to move starting now , because also the , the houses are expensive hm , i do n't believe and we do n't have NN . so you know , when we bought this house , we did n't know that we could have kids . we were married for twelve years already we thought that we were never going to have kids . then two weeks after buying the house , we noticed that , you know , i was pregnant with a girl ¿how are you ? fine , thank you , fine , thanks ¿and where are you calling from ? oh , i 'm calling from new york oh , ok , norma here from atlanta , georgia atlanta , georgia , right , look , uh right , not NNP , please , no i did n't hear very well what the subject was , what we 're going to talk about , uh , uh , what , what we have to talk about about the dates , dating oh about dating oh , like dates , like dating , right , right yes , uh , say , that 's what we had to talk about , at first i did n't understand either no , because NN was talking , it was like a machine , it was speaking spanish like yes with an english accent , ¿do you know what i mean ? yeah , no , its uh , uh it 's the , it 's the machine , i think , or it 's a person . someone who does n't speak spanish well so well , a you ca n't understand it seems like a machine , who learned spanish in a book , you know ? aha , more or less like that no , originally in the house or something . but , well , well , they say we have to talk about dates . yes , they say which were the best and good , hmm , worst dates that you had or something like this , or , how have dates changed over the years ? yeah but i have n't had a date in a while , well , i have n't had very good dates , however . eh , i 've had many more bad ones than good ones . but the thing is that in the date and you , you have a date with other people it 's sometimes difficult , you know ? aha yes , i 've never been on dates , really when , like i entered a religious community , and they do n't do dates there . well they do that now too , but now it 's more done on the internet , right . aha and you have to pay lots of money , do you understand . but the thing is that they charge you . for , that 's why , because the thing is that they need more men , do you understand ? ah , yes because for every man there are like five or six women , something like that . ah it 's good i already found my man so when , when you say that you 're a man , sometimes it says that it 's free for men . for a while or something like that yes because because the more women that get a date with a man NN ? aha so they tell it to other women . ah , yes do you understand , if women get on and do n't need any , any dates . so there is not much business for that , for them mhm they say , they said before that they want more men to make calls because there are many more women that make calls than men . ah , what can i tell you . mhm and you do n't know who that person is , you do n't know anything about that person . maybe you like sports and the other person does n't like them or you enjoy going to the park or something like that and the other person absolutely VBZ it , do you follow me ? mhm yes that 's why , at least they but , you have to be careful too because sometimes , if you , for example personally meet someone from the internet , you yes , oh , yes many times , yes they have bad NNS some people , you do n't even know how they are they have bad NNS bad NNS and you , they say things that are not true . yes , that 's right do you understand , but , oh , but at least you have their picture in the internet . and they are ten , fifteen years older now , or even twenty years older and they show you the pictures of when they were twenty years younger . do you understand , when you meet them in person , they are a bit JJ and stuff like that , do you understand ? yes , sometimes , many times , it 's dangerous to solve well , oh , oh , there 's danger in everything , what can i say . but sometimes , there 's more than in other parts , in other parts , do you understand ? you have to be careful , you are not close to the , hurricane NNP and all that ? the hurricane , JJ o , well , god is great , it has n't happened here , no hurricanes , the first one , katrina , took place in the north of georgia . aha no , it 's like , it caused no damage there in the north of georgia yes , in the north of georgia just a few , very few , but no , no um yes , but the other one , NNP , it passed right in front of texas , so we are not outside the hurricane zone . yes , that 's right , it 's been a very busy season oh yes , katrina and NNP was more powerful than katrina . they were saying that is VBG in puerto rico yes , but they do n't know why the hurricanes there start in the ocean , you understand me ? yes aha then it come to land , when they get to land they fall but before they do a bit of damage . you have to take NNS for , i 'm going to tell you something , before when there were hurricanes , right , yes like my brother in florida when they would say hurricanes there , they did n't even pay attention to it , okay , okay but now , after they saw what happened with katrina , right , now everybody gets scared you saw , you saw the people that were getting out of texas you saw , more , more than a thousand people have gotten out of texas , already . mm to , to leave your home and leave , now the people leave , they leave , eh , they leave that there behind , you understand me ? hmm you take the family and you go , you know what i mean yes but hey , can i tell you , this is life , you know ? sure , there 's danger everywhere in this world . aha , yes but yes there are different kinds of NNS , it 's a danger from other people or other living beings , there are NNS from natural NNS . or , yes , this is life , what can i tell you ? i sometimes look at nature and how the animals live and all this , there 's danger out there too aha sure for the animals and all this and if there 's fire , and all the things that happen . hmm that this is live in general , you know . you have to be careful about all these things . yes , this is i saw the propaganda on the television always happens ah yes , yes this is what i said , here in new york you see , how things go everywhere . going on the bus and when they go to sure because it seems like now it 's really like society has advanced so much and society has advanced so much so everything has different i know NNS and i know , they do n't find a partner very quickly . they do n't have , the NN , yes , and the thing but now the people are yes , and , the time that you like they say career VBN and the time that it takes to do all the things that you have to do , aha study , you have to go to the job that you do this , and this , and the other , you understand me mm and also that the things that the people have changed a lot too , that the people . aha they look at certain NNS that they are looking for , you understand me ? and certain , that they are looking for , before they did n't do that before there was a woman and a man , and that 's it , you know , but now already yes now like you say the people have become more JJ one is yes , yes , more JJ exactly , exactly , more JJ more and , and they have good reason to do that , understand ? aha because , yes because i thought a little more JJ because the thing is that at least is looking for something that is more JJ , more information , a NN , of the person , understand ? not only is another person understand ? mm but you know , it has certain , certain things that you can look for , you understand me ? understand that you accept and you do n't accept , understand me ? but , that 's the life together eh , eh , how can i tell you . sure that 's why i suppose that there are more of those dating those on the internet have become very popular right , oh , yeah , oh yeah . because people no they open their computer and there they can find can meet with other people , talk with other people yes they put , put the same interest that you have , aha and the interest that the other person has and how they say that they have something more religious , they 're looking for a kind of person who has more religion inside , you know ? hmmm hmm they put this there , things that , you accept of do n't accept . NNP , and so , so well , it 's a reason , it 's good , you know ? are you married ? i , i , i yes , i 'm married . yes , ah , okay i 've been married for many years , but ah , but before i was n't married i was divorced , once , and after i got married . oh , okay so , so even if i 'm not dating right now but , in the future , no , i do n't hope to do this in the future either . yes because i 'm getting a bit older and i do n't have a lot of time for any other thing . because i 'm also married , you know ? sure so , i 'm not looking but i VBP , i 'm VBG what i see on other places like you say , an advertisement , on the internet , all this . hmm because there 's a dating , dating , you know ? aha date , and date and date , and something like that . once that yes , now , it 's , no , there are many , many ways to do these things , no yes , yes oh well it 's business , it 's a big business , business right now , you know , yes like how now it 's all a business , so everything 's a business , and with , with , we are , this , we are in the age of information hmm i do n't know if you 've heard , heard that , the age of information , know what i mean ? that you , you , uhm , get information real NN , yes sure , now everything , everything about anything , anything at all you want , you go to internet information even cell phones can go to internet , that way you can without having to go to your personal computer , laptop , whatever yeah , oh , yes , oh , yes , of course , of course , of NN now you open your phone , and if you have a phone , well , connected to internet not only that , but you can look at the other person , and you call them and they take a picture , and when you 're looking at the cellular , cell phone you see the picture is there live if you VBP you 're talking , right , and they 're showing how it looks and all that good evening . what 's your name ? i 'm joe . my name 's carmen and i 'm from chicago . what 's your name , sorry ? my name 's carmen and i 'm from chicago . and you ? oh , i 'm from , i live in colorado , but originally from puerto rico . well me too , i 'm from puerto rico but i live in chicago . oh , how nice . have you been living there long ? NNP here in chicago ? yes . thirty years . wow . and . do you know the topic , the topic of the day ? yes , it has to do with the , hmm , the worst dates , and your best dates . this , speaking of the internet , how do you find it and if you think you can find aha . do you start or do i start ? as you like . if you wish to start , i 'll listen to you . some RB days without my girl aha because since i have JJ NN with her , well , mm , yes , when i do n't have her with me i get really sad aha and you ? hello ? aha yes , and you , what are your best and worst dates ? well , the worst dates are , ah , when it comes , ah , the mother 's day , christmas , new years NNP , my mom 's birthday . she is in puerto rico and i am here yes , my mom is in puerto rico also and the best ones VBP three years ago , ah , that i have spent with her , ah , thank god , i spent christmas , new NNP 's NNP and her birthday , that was three years ago oh , really ? how good , and do you go often to puerto rico ? oh , i have gone , these last three years , i have gone about two or three times a month oh , wow and you ? mm , i , ah , it 's been too long since i last went to my little island . since ninety three wow yes , that was the year when my father died , and i have n't gone back since then where are you from ? i was born in san juan oh , i 'm from NNP . from NNP , yes i have . no , i , i have friends and relatives all over the island , as i also have eh , family in , in many parts of the east coast aha . but i do n't remember having many , yes some family in chicago . oh . yes , i 've met many friends here in colorado that have come from there , from chicago . and , you like it a lot over there , where is really cold in winter , right ? oh , yes , man . yes , i can imagine . here it snows but not as much as it snowed before in the eighties , here it snowed that it ended i think that since the earth has been VBG up more , well it does n't snow that much . and , well that 's also the , of , ah , of this time also is the bad thing the NNS that we 've been having like what i went through on nine eleven , now that is this season of katrina that 's also ah real bad times . horrible , horrible , horrible . who are staying . they brought them to a military base because close to where i live there is an air force base aha . but i have n't been able to see them yet , i have n't seen them because i do n't know what happens when they 're put they 're , if they go out or not , well i do n't know who they are aha . but here in chicago there came some , eh , i think they caught a plane and , ah , it was RB VBN yes . but it 's been really really bad because they are having NNS but yes . so it is , but one day they will have to pay for their NN hmm , hmm , hmm . aha . well yes , and regarding the internet , do you connect to the internet a lot ? my daughter , ah , VBZ to the internet a lot . i do n't , because i do n't have time , i work and i only have free time when i come home from work oh , yes ? where do you work ? i 'm a NN and i work , ah , taking care of a man . oh , and i take care of kids in the morning and in the afternoon , and after four i take care of a man until ten at nice and i 've just gotten back now . wow , you 're a really hard worker , no ? yes wow , poor thing , so you do n't have a lot of time to have fun ? only saturday and sunday . saturday and sunday , yes . and how many kids do you have ? i have a girl who 's eighteen and a boy who 's sixteen . oh , wow . and you ? well , after being older i had my daughter , so i , i supposed year , from my first marriage i probably would have had a son , a daughter who 's twenty five . but my daughter is only five oh , still a baby . eh , sure , it 's like a capacity to appreciate more the NN of being a father . i love being a dad . i 'm JJ . well she 's here with me , because her mom and i are divorced , and she 's with me three times a week , all week we have a really good time because we 're playing right now . what are you playing ? NNP ? eh , we play a lot of things , she likes me to run her all over the house and this and , yes aha , like a NN . like a NN and all this , yes . it 's RB , she 's half mexican and half puerto rican . oh , yes ? and she 's always crazy , she 's crazy because to know the island oh , she does n't know , she still does n't know puerto rico . oh , that 's good . and i always look for information on something , i find it on the internet . it 's a , it 's helped me a lot in many things , also in the NNS , well i 've met good people , but this is to know more how to know more about only friendship , to look for a girlfriend , something , well i do n't think that it 's really ideal because on the internet it's aha , aha . dangerous . and well , no , i do n't have much NN , in fact when i thought that i could meet good people or something like that , well bad things happened and NN , and i said , no , better not . ah , and she answered and he asked questions and she answered like she was really JJ yes . and he left her in the street , i do n't know how he did it to , how is it ? to steal the bank account do n't tell me . my god . wow , wow . an , it 's that she gave too much information . and he said that , that he had a good job , that this , other , that he was rich and she told him too that she had money and when , all of a sudden she was VBN by everything that he said and he left her in the street . you see ? this is terrible . yes , yes , yes . for the no , and i prefer to meet the person , there in front and aha . no , this no you do n't know if , especially us , as women , we 're not , we do n't know if we 're VBG with a NN , with a NN exactly . aha , aha , aha , aha , aha , aha , and ah sure , i , i have a lot , i like the internet a lot in the JJ sense , and it 's educational and that but in many things like that i take the body e and even if i 've tried a group of puerto ricans and hmm . aha . it 's good , but when you 're in one of them alone , one to one aha . no , it 's a danger too . yes . aha . aha , aha , aha , aha . aha , aha . i always like to talk a lot about my daughter . i love her very much . aha . and where did you meet your wife ? so , i met her in a park , i used to play RB PDT a lot aha i used to play , so she saw me playing in the park , we VBD each other , then we went out , we became good friends and finally decided to marry and were you married for a long time ? no , not really , she had a very strong NN and i am the opposite , i hate fights and NNS aha i do n't like those at all mm so , well , but at least we have a good relation as parents , to our daughter aha , aha and the girl is happy mhm she never hello ? good evening , NNP from connecticut . hello ? hello ? hello , pardon , what 's your name ? NNP , eh , i live in NNP connecticut ah , ok , ok , yes i 'm jose . i live in NNP pardon ? i , my name is jose and i live in philadelphia . oh , ok yes , yes , and and i , i i did n't hear the topic too well then , i do n't know , what the topic is about the topic , is if you 've bought something on the computer , and the companies that call you offering products and things . ah that offer you trips , and offer you free things , if you 've bought something on the internet , of there , of those offers that they call you to offer you . that tell you that you will have some vacations , eh , for such amount , and is free , nothing is free , at the end . ah , i mean , and do you buy a lot of things on the internet , or no ? no , i do n't , i do n't . no ? my daughters use it , and my boyfriend uses it , but not me . ah ah , no i do n't buy i do n't , i do n't trust the internet too much , ah for me is not too yes i , well now i 've already started buying lots of NNS , on , on the computer and , yes for me it has worked , it has worked out very well . oh and then i bought it on the internet , for , like fifty dollars yes , my boyfriend has bought NNS of , he is a NNP and has bought light NNS , and music system NNS , but i do n't , i do n't use it . my ah no i do n't feel like too safe , in information , especially when they ask , family name , and all that JJ no , i do n't like it yes , no , and , and the NNP card names , that i do n't like . yeah it seems to me that someone might say , look , i 'm going to get in here , here in one of those companies ' NNS . hmm , yes yes , this and he stole millions , millions of dollars . yes , it 's true , it 's true . yes , everything has its ah but i especially , i do n't use it . and it turns out that the person to whom she bought it was illegal , it was an illegal activity , right ? so she sent me the check , but she never sent me the the computer and here also , a man bought a car , and he gave , he was asked five thousand dollars in advance aha advance , so he sent the five thousand dollars , and he never saw the car , the guy did n't exist , the company oh , oh there was nothing at all , he went to the place where it was supposed to be , he went there with the police oh when they arrived to the place , it was JJ , absolutely JJ , it was the right address but it had never been VBN by that person oh so he was VBN , and lost five thousand dollars . so , that 's why no , that 's sad , because just figure , VBG five thousand dollars like that , right ? yes hmm mm it 's hard five thousand dollars that you know you wo n't VB , because if you send a money order , once it has been VBN , how can you find that person ? yes yes . no , what happened to my mother , is that she saw the person , and then she called the police , of , of the state , and also to the local , she called all the NNS and the NNP also , of course , but she said '' so many cases they have to deal with . . ' so , the NNP wo n't be getting into a case like that , where it 's about five hundred dollars , and , uh , nothing important , ¿right ? , so , the NNP did n't go in , but the local police went to see the , uh , the person and then i imagine they VBD him ¿right ? , so they told him `` look , if you give back the VBN money to everyone '' , because that was uh , that was a NN that included maybe ten people , fifteen people , because he said he had several computers for sale and it was the same one , that he was selling to everyone right ? , i think it 's a computer that did n't existed . i mean , yes , he said , he said something like `` i have six computers '' , and the truth , so , everyone thought the price was great , there are several that bought , and he received the NNS and VBD them and never sent anything , but yeah , hu , my mom called the police and she VBD that , they got there at seven a . m . and i imagine , i imagine they gave him a pretty JJ talk yeah , right ? right ? , that was only a NN because , uh , and the thing is that that man did n't do it right , because , uh , VB had all of his personal information right , and there's those are the , the half dumb ones that , like i say , the half dumb VBZ no , no , no , that 's a they give you all the information and they do n't know they 're going to catch them later , NNS right . no , he was an ignorant here too . of course , mom was very lucky , she did n't suffer i was sent a letter saying that , obviously , i wrote to them and told them i was interested in VBG for their university so please send information , right ? so , all they knew about me was , i do n't know , my name , my e mail , birth date yes , that 's why they ask for all your personal data , and they use it to make it JJ yes , no , no . yes , but , but then , but they did n't have NN , nor the social security number or anything , and then they sent me a letter saying that oh , there was a NN who entered , who got in NN system and stole all the information . so i said , luckily , no , no , no , it was nothing important , really oh my goodness so , it 's dangerous . i think that , it seems to me that it will be a problem in the future , but now , the benefits are so much no , that 's right NN in the internet , and they have no problem yes , that 's true and i know other people who , forget it . , they are VBN even the social security on the internet a , that someone get you , NNS your computer , and your credit card , and find information about you , and use it the problem is that you , for fifty years , every year , you take some NNS yeah and i think that in the end , the NN of that happening to you during your NN , lets say , in fifty years , it really is , it 's pretty high , really you start using the credit cards at eighteen , twenty years old , hm mm and between twenty and seventy years , well , but i think that eventually , something is going to happen , that 's true i hope that they keep VBG , the security issue , for the computers because you VBP your NNP and they find ways to collect your NNP . you that 's right . no , and NNS have a very big NN for getting your information because for example , in computers , there are lots of NNS out there . i 'm josefina , who is that ? i 'm miguel angel hi , miguel angel , how are you ? very well , very well , and you , josefina ? where are you ? here in philadelphia , do you remember that we spoke and that ah , VBZ that you were at university yes , hi , how are you ? , ah it 's that you said josefina , sure , and for a moment i did n't , hi what a coincidence no , NNS have met again , that 's good NNP , what truth , what a thing , strange what NN , yes that 's good , yes , would you do me a favor and explain to me , what did that man said because i did n't understand a thing look i did n't understand very well either , but i think i think that it had to , it has to do with JJ sales i mean oh , with that that they call you on the phone and they want to sell something aha ah , ok , because he says something yes , that if you have something by phone or through the internet yes , yes , and it must be if you have bought things , no yes , yes , i imagine , exactly , i imagine it has to do with or if they 've sold it long distance shopping i mean , well , through the telephone , no sure or through the internet , because of all of that , so oh , well , i 've bought , i have , yes , yes , things like yes , but through the internet or through the phone ? well , i , in and , oh , JJ , do you know about JJ yes , sure , JJ , yes , yes aha , i bought a book mhm , mhm yes , i bought , i 've bought several things a NNP one i mean , no , i believe it was for work , sometimes you i mean , it was a JJ book aha , something like that , we were taking some courses aha oh , they asked us to read some NNS , so i see you can find that book at thirty five dollars but i got it there in two dollars . look , you know and , do you know this website , it 's called , the one that you use to look for used books a NNP o NNP no , a NNP NNP a NNP NNP , add all oh , yes do you know it ? no , no , i had n't seen that one well , write it down , it 's three NN aha dot a NNP NNP a NNP NNP aha add all dot com that 's good , okay so , in this website you can search , so , what it does is that it VBZ in all the , all the NNS that sell JJ foreign NN '' english '' online NNP foreign used books mhm they look for the book , the place with the lower price oh , cool i mean , they look it up for you well she looks , she looks in all these NNS on line she looks and does the search and tells you the result sure , she does the search for you then she looks looks in a few NNS ah , in the second NNS online and , and she gives you a list VBD , from cheaper to more expensive ah , wow and then she takes out the JJS one , that 's very good i that 's good i 've bought a lot of things like that , because later of course what it does it VBZ you to the JJ page of wherever , for example if it finds that the JJS price is in NN , well you VBP on , on the JJS ones it sends you directly to ah , to the book NN on NN and well you already bought it through NN , you know but it 's always through the internet i mean is not that you go and then they tell you then you go to no , no , is always by internet , i mean is always online sale mm , okay yes , because sure those are used books and i think that it only has books , sales of used books through the internet and of course is an online store it does n't physically exist , sure . mm ah , okay , i 've VBN books so like that , here RB , ah ah , yes , no , they sent it to me by mail yes , i saw all the NNS of , of but not for professionals , you know , the NNP , NN NNS , all technical books you know yes , aha and these books are really expensive because sure , they come out , they have a very short run . and sure , to earn money the NN makes them really expensive , like a book can VB you one hundred and fifty dollars yes , true really easily . and this is expensive , this is JJR off , it takes the skin off your back paying this money for a book that 's about one hundred pages yes , and what did you do with your computer from here , you bought it here , or you brought it i bought it here . i bought it here because this is something i had , that i did n't know what to do , to buy it in spain or buy it here a plan but i bought it on sale and look , if it breaks hmm where i will have to go and fix it here so i bought it here . well , it 's covered by a NN sure , NNP , if i buy it in spain and it breaks here , well , it will be where i go to VB sure , so it 's good we 'll see , so i bought it here , also you know what happened , it broke twice . like , better that i bought it here aha and there was an offer so that it was in florida and you call an eight hundred number and i do n't know aha and i bought like that because it was a good price when it arrived it was a , like a NN that they call , that , that had ah , yes , one was yes it was different NNS , i mean the NN was of one brand , the screen was was of another brand , the NN and like that so that was like NN , NN , fixed aha and that lasted me like three months or four that 's bad and then i called him and i called him , and they changed the phone and the company did n't exist any more i mean that they did , rule it was a NN and then the second one , now i did sure i VBD for , for the brand sure that there was eh , also for some offers on television but it was that it 's a brand and it 's a NN and all , no , sure , sure , sure of three years , then this one is still running , but it 's good , the NNP too , they 're all good , NNP , NNP mhm , mhm i bought and NNP for myself because here at penn , ther was an offer of , for penn students ah , that 's good and i bought and i paid a thousand dollars less , than if i had bought it , you know oh , it worked out good for you , good with , like that , in the market yes , it was , it was , well , is a computer yes , it cost three thousand dollars aha and i only paid two thousand dollars , in other words i saved a thousand dollars ah , good i saved one thousand dollars but it still got damaged twice , in one year okay , okay , that did come out bad , i think that it 's come out bad and and , ah , well , now i 'll VB on NN , but but do n't they send you a new one , you ca n't say that you want a new one but well that 's what i of course , told them , but they told me , no , no because is under NN and then since the only thing that happens , is that the hard NN came loose , well we changed the NN hard and it was fixed , you know and well the truth is that ever since they did that , it has n't gotten damaged again ah , well so , yes i mean , we 'll see , let 's see , i VBP on NN already everywhere , yes , you need it that it does n't break again , because if it breaks again , i already do n't know what i 'm going to have to do to it , i 'm going to have to send it to hell sure so and how have you felt these days ? are you okay ? fine , i 'm very good , with a lot of work in the laboratory and well , without NNS , that have n't coming out yet , but well the what ? hello , ah , i have n't told you no , that i 'm doing the ah ? i VBP that you are what ? pardon i 'm doing the , doctorate yes , yes . but , but , i did n't tell you that it was in chemistry ah , in chemistry no , i did n't know , i thought you were talking of NN yes , no , is that , okay , okay , is that and this is that i studied NN and i finished it ah , but , but then i studied chemistry also oh , and now you are doing a doctorate , in chemistry and now i 'm doing a doctorate in JJ chemistry ah , and you are looking to work in what area ? or in what ? mm . i would like to do something related to medicines sure , sure in the JJ industry or you know ah , cool NN of NN , eh , the development of NN and all that you know here , okay , and are you doing several NNS ? and you say that you 're VBG sure and well , and , look , JJ chemistry is something like cooking , you know , that you put it on to cook and you do n't know how it will come out like , you can have an idea but yeah , chemistry is really complicated to me always , since it 's not JJ sure , it 's not JJ and i did n't know how to make it , so , so i could understand , no , and there sure , no , no , it 's , it 's complicated , you have to , you have to go in a little , in chemistry 's own language , you know aha work with it a little bit , but it 's true , it 's something a little bit strange , and when you start doing NNS , you realize that that everything comes out a little in the end , you know an and after , but , and after it turns out well and then you say , well , what did i do , no , sure , exactly , then it turns out well and you apply it a NN , when it comes out , but when it did n't turn out no one knew , you know ah , how funny , no yes , like that this is , it 's a little JJ , yes , it 's a little JJ ah , but well , here we are , here everyone sees , and we take the NN but and now you 're , eh , where are you now , at home , in your house well , i 'm in front of the laboratory , i 'm in the street , because i got the fisher call in the street oh my god and i 'm here sitting on a NN , in front of , of my laboratory . and have a lot of people called you ? eh , no this week i think that i have n't talked to anybody else because i mean , these days i 've had calls from the ones of fisher but then i have n't been able to answer them , you know ah , you got in that you could n't yes , then no , this machine would leave me a message , that i could n't understand anything and , and that , but no mm i would 've called you because ah , since i have your phone i would say any moment i 'll call him , weekend and that ah , sure you call me at any time , girl if you want we can even meet or whatever you want , this weekend i 'm taking it off , you know mm and i was thinking of going to the new jersey NN but at the end the friend i was going with VBN out , you know , ah , good NN so i do n't have any plans , i stayed without any plans for the weekend ah , good , maybe i 'll give you a call so call me if you want you live in center city or no , no , RB NNP in the north east ah NN but is city of philadelphia i mean yes , yes , yes , yes ah , good , good have to or that is yesterday i was calling from the NNP , you know where i was yesterday . mm . at , at , at NNP hospital . ah , yes . yes , because a friend of mine was not well , he 's sick . and it 's oh which one of them , because i believe there are NN . i VBP to see him at this , this place is between there 's one , ah , yes , yes , downtown ah . what happened to your friend . an accident or something ? hello ? hello ? yes , hello ? hello , how are you ? fine my name is NNP . my name is NNP NNP , how are you ? fine , from where ? ah , what ? where are you calling from ? i 'm calling from seattle , washington seattle , washington ? yes wow where are you ? in miami oh , and how 's everything over there ? fine , hot as always okay , nothing of that hurricane no thank god , this time , there was n't much . the last one yes . VBN ? with katrina there was a lot of NN and a lot , eh , many people had a lot of problems . okay so and over there i know you do n't have hurricanes but earth a few NNS . and now i think that something with NNP NNP . NNP 's , they said that maybe something will happen again . i do n't know what it is i just saw it on television , always something you really have NNS over there ? yes , every now and then , but they 're not that hard . wow it 's been three years since we had one that was a little bit strong . wow . i did n't know this but , no , not all the time . so , and what do you think about telemarketers ? not much . i do n't like them no , no , my husband and i bought this button , that you , when you an answer , you hear that it 's them , you open the button and until it says NN , NN VBD the person who 's there , after calling , does n't answer this kind of call . it says it three times . wow i say no , we , eh , we put ourselves on the do not call list aha and you know , when they call , which is not much eh , normally i always tell them , you know , not to call again . that , that we are on the list . but we put our house phone , the cellulars , everything because they were even calling me on the cellular no , the only , the only thing i 've gotten is when they call me from the police here from where , i live . yes yes but no , the other day one called me , and because they said they wanted me to VB my house , and told me my husband was laughing because , i 'm here sitting , and i say no , i 'm the one who rents , i do n't live here and he laughed because i did n't want to talk with them . i they stay sometime , no when they call , you know , they start telling me whatever . i do n't want to get JJ with them . yes , aha , exactly and i hang up . my husband , did you take his name and if they call again , we could , i mean , no , i did n't take his name , i just hung up . and i say , and i say , who is it , and she says , no who i am , and i say , aye look at you . these JJ people , so , i thought it was someone i knew . yes laughed because he came , and looked at me , and says to me , how much email do you have here . i say eighty four . and i think that out of these eighty four , only fifteen are yes so , here i will put my , my NN more , higher , higher , so yes they catch everything , so it does n't come to be , because i have three or four email NNS . and what i do is when i , eh , i 'm you know , for a NN or whatever , ah , yes and for the personal things , the , you know , my family , my friends , whatever , i give another . and the one i always give for , for NNS and things like that , it 's the NNP one yes i think that it was two or three weeks when i had n't VBN it , and when i VBD it , i had two thousand something emails . and my husband looked at me and said , well you 're popular yes ah , it happened to me once that a company sent me , she sent me thirty six thirty six , every hour . wow so i spent three days with that . every once in a while . and i say , oh god . until they finally VBD to the email i had sent them telling them that and , sometimes , when they send me email if it 's interesting you know , could be . like today they sent me something of oh and , then you know , that for me , to see and , i realized that here , you know , like two or three houses from here , there 's one . and i , i received one before yesterday , that surprised me because of that yes , it was from shop dot com hm mm is a NN they have out , but they sent it because see how they knew my , where i lived , hm mm and they sent me the NN JJ aha that a girl had taken had brought the kids from NNP here to washington wow i say , that , that does interest me , because if i see , if i see it , i can say something , but they do n't send me anything else but that . i say , well okay . so , and do you have kids ? ah , look and is good to know about those sex NNS because here i had one i did n't know i had one in the back part of of my house . there 's a street , and next to the street there 's a big park . huge . and at the end of that street a lady was renting the room to a man . yeah , that , that 's what surprised me , that , i put the address and we live in a community that has , lets say about two hundred houses right and i live in the eighty eight , sorry , eighty six right but the number , since the houses are VBN , well , it was number one hundred and nineteen , and one hundred and twenty two right and that 's VBG on the NN , from here oh three or four houses , you know uh huh from here , but my little girl has n't , you know , she does n't , she does n't go out alone , because she 's very little . yes , and , and , i do n't know , i , you know , that , that always , it VBZ me a lot , well , ¿who does n't ? hm mm i mean , i , i used to be a teacher and i used to , i used to have a student that had had a similar problem , you know , he was abused or whatever . aha , yes and it was quite hard , you know , for me , for me , and for him too . of course , it was harder for him but aha you know , as his teacher , you never know how how to , if you should touch him or talk to him because yes , or like , how to treat him , if the problem he has is because he ca n't understand what 's going on or because , you know , for what has happened to him hm mm so , it 's a bit difficult . but , you know , thank god , you know , no , no , it did n't happen a lot , but when it did , it was hard . but , did you say that you have a fifteen year old son ? wow but he has moved out now . oh so , i told him , if you do n't want to stay in school , you should look for a job and so , he moved out . if he wanted to stay in my house he had to go to school . well and he 's like no mom , i 'll do it when i 'm thirty years old and i 'm like , okay , no problem then . when he 's thirty . well oh no , but sometimes i , sometimes there are some good things with telemarketing , they give you information but not all the time . most of the time , i believe that hello good afternoon . how are you i 'm josefina here in philadelphia , and you ? ah , i 'm also in philadelphia . yes i 'm mayra , yes a nice to meet you . you have been a JJ time here . a NN , that 's good . and you ? oh since , like fifteen years . a long time ago yes wow and how is it ? well more or less this is a quiet city , but , nothing new , nothing spectacular , no . and i 'm still getting used to the weather , in fact . from yes i used to live in mexico before . so it was n't , it was n't tropical , but it was n't as cold as here . it was very different . yes no , i 'm already VBG . and where are you from ? originally from venezuela . from where ? from venezuela . at least , yes then i moved here , since i had friends , i kept on staying and that , then my son got married here mhm and yeah now i 'm stuck with the grandchildren wow , that 's nice . oh you too . you 're young , no , you 're young ? yes , i 'm studying at the university now , i just started my second year . aye how nice . what are you studying ? ah , my god , where ? so , yes , at penn at temple . at penn aha , ah hmm so it 's a bit heavy , but that 's how it goes . yes , it will calm down , hmm yes ah , and you live with your family . aha and so my family stayed in mexico and right now they just moved to san antonio , texas . so at least they 're closer , i speak with them and see them and everything . good NN , and they have n't gotten those hurricane NNS ? no they have n't gotten them , luckily they are very far form the coast . aha so they did n't get any of that . yes yes is very bad , who knows what has happened all of a sudden there 's been a lot of hurricanes . besides it would be too much , it ran out . and then i said , ah , i thought it was running out in the whole city , but then , this morning there was . no , is not so much because it said two ninety eight , no . okay i thought that i was going to fill it with twenty dollars but no . yes , how it changes , one thing with the other . this also seemed to me pretty wow , i say , it was a NN there but i did n't think that it would affect the outside country so much . besides right , because yeah , besides winter is coming , this is true . i did n't think about this , it will be really expensive . seriously , about how much do you spend on VBG a month ? ah , i do n't know if you have to pay for a whole apartment , or what . ah , perfect , this is the best . aha it 's the best , it was good for me , yes . wow on gas only , and eh , i was thinking that there are apartments that they rent them including gas and i say , like i 'm going to have to get one of those because , well maybe , maybe they 'll stop doing that , because is not going to be good for the , that 's what i say , that now everything is going to increase because , they rent like that , yes yes one thing NNS , everything NNS and like that i do n't know . i do n't know , we are a bit JJ because these things had never happened to us , no . yes JJ , but , ah and where does all your family live , where does your son live for example ? here in the north east with the grandchildren , too . north east in philadelphia with his wife , yes . no , the truth is that more or less , since i do n't have a car here . yeah you can get to know the city really well . but right now , i ca n't well , i only go in metro or in some NNS and yeah it isn't aye god . hmm oh but now that the year is starting and everything 's JJ and then it will start to get cold , so it 's not the same . oh yes , and do you have many friendships ? more or less . i 've already spent two years here so at the beginning i did n't go out much , but right now i have some more people i 've met more people . sorry ? and have you met people through this program ? you have n't met people from philadelphia through this program . more people well , besides me can you hold on a moment , what happened who ah , okay sorry . aha then she 's just saying hi , only . yes is that here , well is like we share rooms , aha and each year they practically change the person with whom you live . if you go to NNP NNP there also , but just when there are events , yes i like to go , i 've gone a couple of times with the whole latin community aha yeah , a lot of people go , and they do JJ and JJ and all the NNS . ah well because well here we are all the mexicans and the latins well we are very united . that 's something i like which is making my life easier also . so yes , this is good because when it VBD me , when i miss home a lot , or something , well i go with them , i can go and dance with them and yeah . hmm there where they dance , are there many places to dance ? it helps be a little . there are n't many , i only like one , i like two . that 's pure , pure salsa and pure cumbia . but not more , yes , to brazil , i go there , it 's one and there 's another really good one that 's NNP NNP . that 's more like a club . yes , and NNP , between NNP and NNP yes and we love it , this is really good . sorry . hmm and they always invite for NN there , or to a party or something , now they 're going to have a party one of these days yes , yes , there 's a lot of parties , we 're also going rent . the mexicans , to have a party , half backwards , but for NN there . ah how nice . americans nothing more . ah yes , no . no well , here they drink a lot of NNP . hmm when there 's ah , when i 'm there at the NN with this hispanic NN , or mixed or whatever there is . aha , yes well there are many that go to NNP NNP . mm and they always let us know , well . that if they are going to put you know , an offering that if a mass , or things like that . at least the cultures are similar , right , catholic . yes and always the virgin of NNP is the one we follow the most . mm yes i think that , i mean we have the town and which is all for the virgin in mexico . ah yes is very important . mhm ah , there must be , i 'm sure that there must be in the south or something like that there are many things where there are sales of , of religious NNS . yes or yes no house of religion but yes and there they sell some NNS that are very good , in the center , at eleven also that i stopped to eat there in front of NNP hospital near there , i do n't know if , ah , yes i know , no yes . yes yes is they brought other new ones this summer . JJ , JJ at the end as a NN , all the same there was very nice he gave me NNS . there where that he gave me free NN , or some other thing for free and yeah in front of NNP yes , yes , yes oh , i have to go over there , because it 's been a while since i 've gone by before because i used to live there at ten and all that but , mm that there 's also a house of a ladies ' NN , but after my family arrived i came here to , to a house and then to an apartment . and you do n't go much to the city then , like to center i hello , eh , with whom do i have the pleasure of speaking ? ah , with joe . and what 's your name ? ah , my name 's silvia , nice to meet you . yes nice to meet you and where , where are you ? philadelphia and you ? ah , i 'm also in philadelphia , what a coincidence . ah yes , yes i live at pennsylvania university . and where do you live ? ah , just , just outside , outside of the city , yes ah , what a coincidence . yes . and how , tell me again what 's your name ? joe joe , ah , very good , very good yes , and what do you think of telemarketing ? look , eh , these telemarketers i , threw them all out of the country . ah yes , why ? eh , they 're NNS and only , give private business a bad name . eh , believe me that i remember that when they were before NN the law that was going to VB them a lot and would take away a lot of business . they were saying that , that they VBD an eh , eh , an important job . no , well i think that 's right because well but we should then say , they should n't go after anyone , the NNS or the drug NNS . who ? my aunt . oh , yes yes ah yes , my aunt lives in puerto rico and she 's had lots of problems since they approved that law . yes , no , no , it 's been so hard for her , so , well , sure , she has a legal job , it 's not like she 's a NN or a drug NN , yes she has a good and JJ job , it 's a shame , really oh that they 've VBN it because she 's now VBG NN benefits and all that JJ yes , JJ , yes getting NN benefits . because during time it has been very difficult , but then if you think that might be spam ? unfortunately spam is another , so many businesses and some are good some are bad telemarketers are those that VBP more spam you try to defend but they send a lot of spam mhm okay most of them are private companies mhm , mhm , um , right ? and i think JJ wants to do something about all spam and mhm most of them send emails mhm the computer has to do the job of VBG spam okay so most of the time you have to process the information and it takes a little time oh , okay mm so then the problem is that they send it thousands of people yes exactly , because if you only send it to one person it does not matter yes yes we send thousands , or perhaps millions of emails . eh , yes , yes , aha then it is JJ already , but i do n't know what has happened with that now , but , but nowadays the NN i have is that VBG comes more from the outside , because here it is already a little more difficult eh that is the NN i have yes , no , i do n't think the VBG MD work with the spam because eh , eh , i think it is too complicated , i think it is easier , if you do something like this then you can you can decide to get only some of the emails , receiving only some emails that have a certain NN , given by , for instance if you have windows you have to receive a code , but that code , let 's say , can only be VBN if they do , if they process the information that needs to be VBN mhm it is like a key , right ? , that the computer needs mm to find , then , if it finds the key , you get the email , otherwise you know automatically that it is spam mhm mhm mm i think so , but obviously it wo n't VB that VBP if it has n't been done yet mhm , mhm but yes , yes yes because the NN does n't , does n't work , it is too complicated because yes because , because there are so many , probably that is the problem too , if there is a company who sends advertising because i for instance get them of a company , here in the states , travel which is a travel agency mm and , and they send emails every two weeks of , of all the NNS they have aha and eh , i 'm interested in receiving them because that 's something that really interests me because that eh out of NN , what they have right aha but eh , but for that company it would make it very hard if one gets a system like that , it would be very JJ for them , right yes that is true , mm , mm yes then just all how they say mass mail would be hard for them , but that 's the least i say , i think that 's the least . mm , now but i was talking the other day because spam they say that with a lady in chicago that she was very RB telling me , because when the telemarketers call here i tell them so and so is not here , or call her back at such time . aha and one says , but because she , she is really JJ , of how she VBZ them , but eh , i say , but how is it that this lady has n't realized that , that with these people that call on the phone , what you have to do is , just , not answer , hang up the phone without talking to them , or not answer , and , and it was a shame because the call got disconnected and i was going to tell her about the service system from the company that i have , mm where eh if a per when they call eh , it does n't let calls go through that do n't identify the company . oh , yes the , a land line , it 's just a cellphone and , uh , well the telemarketers have never called me i do n't know , maybe there 's no law for that i do n't know there must not be a law , because i remember that with the fax , they passed a law that they could n't send JJ material , uh , over the fax uh and it was because people used your paper uh i imagine this happens in an NN where the NNS still had JJ paper . is eh , it was more expensive and more JJ hmm eh , and , and because of that is that the , the companies receive very few commercial NNS and , and it is against the law that eh , you can take them to court and VB them because of that i read about that once hmm yes well with my cell phone i think it is because i have never , i never give my cell number yes eh , for well but you never give your number and the telemarketers find it no , no , no , well that is surely because if you have a , a credit card you give your telephone number , the credit card has it then the , maybe the credit card company VBZ to a company that has a bank , then the bank has the name then the bank call or maybe yes somehow they get the number , get the number but i remember the credit cards i gave them a wrong number on purpose . hmm and one time , they told me i told them i gave them a wrong number on purpose because you instead of use it RB , only use it hmm to call you if there is a problem with my credit card you use it for a lot of commercial things and even you sell it to whoever wants to buy it . hello good evening good evening , how are you today ? good thank you , i 'm josefina in philadelphia , and you ? eh , eh , new york oh , new NNP , and your name ? ernestina ernestina , i 'm josefina , we 're in the NN josefina ? yes oh , ok nice to meet you aha , and how are you today ? good thank you because the weather is nice today . yeah really that 's true aha ah yes everything is RBR it looks no . yeah the NN the hurricanes have stayed a bit NN . that really was VBG yeah , do you have a , do you have a problem with telemarketing ? no , well , they do call me all the time to sell me things um hu or to ask about things aha you must get those calls too . yes , every day oh my god , really , how is that possible . yeah it 's pretty annoying oh my baby is here . who ? my , my baby oh , really aha who is it ? what ? what 's his name ? the wide the wide aha , i see , he 's now two years old oh , that 's nice he 's here in my bed that 's nice , is he falling asleep . aha oh do you , do you have children ? i have an older one , he 's married . oh , how old , how old ? he 's thirty seven oh and he 's married , i 've got two grandchildren . oh , so they are young one more , one more has . oh thirty eight years old . you have a daughter . aha really yeah , i have , it 's not that , that , i have two , two boys yes , boys aha , and oh and grandchildren . a husband aha that 's it . that 's it . do you have a husband ? oh my son was pretty young oh yes , we were , there were different times back then . oh and i stayed with him until he grew up and got married how old are you now ? no , JJ , sixty oh yeah and me forty seven ah , you are young are , young no yes , of course you are you have kids but big ones , but you are young . no okay and did you always live in new york ? yes your whole life . always and you ? well here in philadelphia yes , i 've been fifteen years . oh yeah fifteen years , i lived in california before . and i found a job and i stayed . oh is with my father , i live with my father oh , that is he 's old . he is ninety two years old . yes , he 's old , old . but he 's very , very good i think because everything is good . yes we are the two of us . and your mom ? who ? mother oh , yeah , oh boy aha you have your family ? um uh family of mother and father and all . wow no , i do n't have my family . ah , but are they not living , or yes no are alive , ah what a shame , they are very needed . you have , ah yes , one that 's good , one is good , at least . ah i do n't have any my sister is crazy why ? is she in new york ? she 's crazy ah , ah , ah yeah she 's fifty four years old ah okay and she lives alone but she 's crazy . poor her , why ? if she lives alone she 's not so crazy . if she lives in new york neither . new york is big oh my god is very big . oh yeah you new york oh , yeah , yeah , oh , yeah uh , i sometimes go to all , all the people are crazy and crazy ah , ah , ah um everything is nice , but is big , big , big , many people , but is nice i like everything . um it has but not that many many people have left because the insurance is very expensive , everything is expensive , so then there are people that are moving to another area , i do n't know . we are not so and the , the rent um the rent the rent , better than new york yes is true yes , i pay five hundred and forty oh , yeah it 's good right . for two , two NN two bedrooms . ha NNP , very expensive . yeah that 's not good . yeah many people modern , over there , i go to atlantic city , do n't you go to atlantic city ? yeah aha to do some NN seeing . yeah , do you like atlantic city ? i like it , i do n't VB , but i like the sea , i like the . the stores yes right i like the nice hotels , NN , but i do n't spend money NN . yeah yeah , philadelphia is like . so JJ old , no . all the old buildings , yes . there 's , there 's . where 's your dad now ? and we just came back . and so , and how did you get into the program ? do you have a lot of calls ? no , yeah , yeah many VBP they call every day , no . aha , ah good . yes they 're beginning , ah , because you are n't at home of course . yeah and how many do you have ? ah , i 'm at , like nine . yeah , me too . aha and i have met people here , nice , yes , very nice people . yeah NNPS live in , eh , florida , yes miami . new york too no first time , and you ? oh my one in colorado aha philadelphia yes , yes . ah , california today from california . and you philadelphia , where in philadelphia ? aha , aha , aha , aha , but , not new york . no , they still have . then they call you from new york i think that they call from several different states , right ? yeah , yeah is nice i like it a lot because , all the people are very pleasant . well about marketing they do call but i do n't work much with marketing , i do n't do much . shopping , nor , nor by internet ad , none of that . do you buy through marketing ? you talk more than before no . do you buy things by phone ? no , it does n't have , i do n't have that on my phone aha but that because they call you NNS ' , every day . ah , a problem for me and that they want your credit card yeah they want to sell something that you have to pay right now and send ah , ah , ah your social security i say , no , no , no yeah , well no i do n't know who it is , i do n't know . yeah what do you think of this , what do you think of that ? what would you like ? i do n't know . a lot of questions yeah but it 's better to be private your , your aha , aye , aye , aye your personal things aha , many questions every day , aye , aye good evening , i 'm joe NNP , good evening good evening . how are you ? what 's your name ? fine , manuel manuel yes how are you manuel ? eh , good where do you call from ? from chicago , NNP . chicago , i live here in colorado , denver , colorado . okay hm , how he VBZ the NN , sometimes VBG what he tries to say , but i think he is talking , about marketing topic . and as they do in several ways on the phone . electronic , i do n't know how much , they bother you with calls or emails about that oh yes yes , please , talk oh , yes by by phone , not much but i do receive by mail , several times i 'm receiving only offers , and a lot of things , a lot of things i do see , a lot of things i 'm just only well i VBP them , they are thing i 'm not interested in the same happens to me , they used to call my phone before a lot , but with my private phone , but because a new law started here in colorado , almost don't the telemarketers do n't bother on the phone , but they do on internet , i receive a lot of emails VBG for business , and things like that . and sometimes when i answer one of those emails i receive like ten more like that . yes i try to avoid them as much as i can , some things do interest me but , i 'm very careful , about what email i open nowadays . and , and do you go on the internet a lot ? yes , you have a family , how nice . and how are things there in chicago ? eh , they 're fine . no it 's cool , is like , i do n't know like fifty five . it was raining everywhere , the majority of the day , in the morning was fine . here today was really nice , a bit sunny and pleasant . but already , you can already tell that here the weather is going to start changing , well here in the mountains it snows . yes , i was i lived , i was not living , working there in nebraska two years ago , well it 's close to there yes , yes and the cold is very different , there is a lot . um uh and yes i do n't know if i worked outside , but i imagine that it will harm him when he 's in that bad cold of january . that if , how long have you been there in chicago ? i have , coming to five years . five years . and yes , i do work outside , JJ work in construction . NN , and have you gotten used to it ? yes yes , you get used to it like with everything . but yes , it 's different to the , the weather that com , the com , it feels here , like what you feel there , i tell you that i was in nebraska . yes very . do you come from mexico ? and which part of mexico ? from durango durango , yes , i 've been there , i have friends here from durango , i 'm from puerto rico . i 've been here a long time and well here she grew , was born and has grown my daughter too . do you have a large family ? how nice , what a blessing , congratulations . yes i have a five year old daughter , i had her when i was already older and listen , then as far as the internet , trying to get back to the topic . me neither , i used to think before that it was a good idea but you find very strange people there that say one thing and turn out to be a different way and . yes mail , since i have like two or three email NNS yes so they often VBD me with something and i have , and i spend a good while VBG the emails yes is that they put one 's address , they sell it to other people so then one starts to receive all NNS of things . no , you have what you have , the problem is that if you open one mail of something , then they know it is an active address and they start selling it to everybody exactly in my job also , because i use internet a lot in my job , it is a part of my job . just for answering a couple of NNS like these , i went one week on vacations no , two weeks , and when i came back i had more than five thousand emails , can you imagine ? , mixed with my regular NN , because otherwise i would have just VBN JJ wow to it RB , but i had to be careful not to VB the job VBZ i know , when that happened to me i had to check everything because i also had my NNS with my family in mexico oh , yes , how good and i did it through internet , and when i wanted to see if i had a message from them , well , there was one from them and about forty or fifty from others that wow and i had to and do you have a good communication with them , this way via internet ? oh , yes how good , how good yes , i have family in NNP , not so much in durango , most of them left already do you have many brothers and sisters ? yes , i have five wow , i had four brothers , i lost one here in colorado three years ago . but i keep in touch with my other brothers , they live in different places eh , i keep in touch through internet , rather than telephone oh sometimes i get to work and find NN from them , saying hello and things like this i see that 's good it is , more JJ , is n't it yes , entertaining and fun , it 's good to get mail from your friends all over aha and i have made a lot of friends year after year , because i have been using internet since the early NNS , since about ninety three , so ok i am on NNP that is one of the first ones , i remember it was RB slow in the beginning , yes i remember when i started using internet it was really slow aha and now with cable and internet , it is much faster i see in fact , i am studying on line , and that has helped me a lot , because i work full time and i have my daughter , so , i use the night hours , early in the morning , and i study is it easy to study on line ? well it is in the sense of time NN , yes it is . about the subjects of the classes , that depends on the university , because if it is hard , you have to learn a lot in little time , but i find that great , i love it i see and you learn as much as if you were in a NN . because there are classes where you enter and find the teacher and other students or the class is VBN and you can see what they talked about ok so there are also group projects . so there are classes , and there is like what they call in english NN NNS VBP one VBZ about a topic , about topic . i can finish my major because in another way it would be too difficult for me . nowadays with the economy on has to work another aha it 's , it 's hard , i do n't know how is gas over there , but gas is very expensive here . there is , there is there were well , NNS but even so nothing was fixed . so it was like for what it is the city of chicago , from the center towards the north that 's JJ . now on the weekend . yes and , it has n't gone up , but it will go up again . well it affects , it did n't seriously affect the NN , but there in texas there are many NNS and the did a little big of damage and this always affects it , for now , we have the average is around two eighty seven , two ninety here . but it can go up , like you said , it can go up suddenly . aye , and do you have to drive a lot in the city ? hmm , i drive about seventy miles to work . every day ? yeah , going and seventy i was going to say that i do seventy , but you VBP me . hello ? hello . yes ? with whom am i speaking ? NNP . oh , NNP , it 's alex , again , here , from los angeles . oh . hello alex , how are you ? fine . and you ? fine here . i think that the were talking about when you go out , when they call you at home saying if you want to buy magazines of things like that or you o or in your email when they send you JJ JJ things that they want to sell you , things that you did n't ask for . well , ah , sometimes there are good NNS , but other times it 's annoying yes . it 's JJ sometimes what comes here , in , in my email comes pretty close to my house and other things that that you do n't VB they charge you for the NN , they charge you for the JJ and a bunch of things no and also they charge you expensive . then what i do more than anything , i have ah ah , like a voice mail right , like a , a device that shows the phone aha . oh , so , what i have here is that when a call comes out that i know is one of those telemarketing ones or if i hear it i have a , a thing here connected with the phone that i press and once it comes out it starts to do NN , NN , NN three times and says the person you call that you called does n't answer this types of calls it says it three times well yes is like that , annoying if you hear it like that yes . yes , and , and i , i also , i was on , on the other side , i 've done telemarketing and ten or fifteen years ago it was more easy because the people were not so well prepared mm but nowadays is very hard yes , also ah . i had a NN here at my door that surprised me . they VBD at my door . and and was he telemarketing ? until you have to hang up on them . yes , many times it 's , it 's like a NN because they want something from you , they want to steal something from you like i do n't know , your NN or something and its not JJ . aha . NNP . ah , telemarketing eh is dying . your opinion . but eh e that 's where the NN lies , a lot of times , there are companies that are not JJ that say they are VBG money for the police , the NNS . when i , when i do this , i they 're lying to you . i ask , i ask , what 's it called ? the number of the , what 's it called ? because when they get , when they , when you give them a NN they give you the telephone number , the telephone number of , i do n't remember what it 's called and you can find out if they 're legal or not ah . when they 're JJ , JJ NNS they can give you the number that they have because i do this with the yes . and there are also groups , especially when there are hurricanes . i heard this , there are VBG groups who , they call you to , to send them money yes . this is what i heard , i heard that they had caught three people over there in california doing this . yes , i know . but name they were putting everything in the pocket . how bad , ah taking advantage of other people is the worst the people , for them to get money . and , ah and ah , the JJ , of course they gave money because they did n't know . yes . no , and even JJ companies and for example i had to pay a telephone bill this week aha . and , is uh i only had to pay the minimum and the person that was doing the telemarketing for the telephone company was VBG saying that this was going to happen that why did n't i pay more and then i told her , you know what lady ? i only called to pay the minimum , here it says in the letter and with that the phone is not cut off , that is please do n't VB me , just accept the payment and that 's it . ah god . and i say well . to go get your car and like you , like you were telling me i was paying it on the phone mhm and he said , eh , i need you to pay more , and i said , no , i will only pay this , and i have fifteen days for the other , and i will pay the other in fifteen days . no , then we will send someone to get your car yes , that , that is called in english POS pressure NN aha NNP to pressure people to , to try to get more money mhm and it is very used in telemarketing , that 's why it has such a bad NN yes , because people use it and , and it is often used by JJ companies who use it with their own NNS oh , incredible it is incredible , yes , that 's why the NN mm has to be very careful with the , eh , with the telephone calls and you have to know your rights as a NN that 's true , because there are people who never , eh , the rule says you must never give your credit card , your credit card number or you VBP number to anybody who calls or your social insurance number , some people do that yes , because they , they will take your money from the bank yes , and i got one here , one email that was supposed to be an email from my bank , say saying that i needed to that needed some information , that for me to give him ah , to VB him that this was my bank information . and i say , yes , like i 'm going to believe that , that my bank will send me that and my husband , he , he , is ah , a computer NN that he got here in my computer and realized that it was going , that it was n't going directly to the bank , it was going by a different place , so he sent it to i think to the m s NNP and told them that this person was sending things like this . mm . fighting the telemarketing by phone but it does n't necessarily apply to the computer . of telemarketing for , for the person to buy things , i say well , well is too much too much . they get bothered anyways is like , no , like exactly . ah , i think they made some new laws that , that you ca n't ah , you ca n't call people that do n't want to be bothered yes , i think that you get , you have to get on a list and yes . and eh , and it also VBZ to the computer and also to the telephone . for both . or the satellite too aha . in the NN NN this was , so i decided to call and get my satellite . to VBG money out of you . hmmm . so and many of these telemarketing sites also have bad working conditions , they 're horrible places to work and are , and they work like the , with under high pressure . so if they pressure their employees , they will also pressure the NNS . yes , because the NNS in those companies are people who only want to earn money , but in an JJ way , not in way that is JJ then everything is based on , taking your money the way they can hello ? hello . hello . with whom do i have the pleasure of speaking ? well , i 'm JJ , from philadelphia . um , great , great . well , so , the topic was , well , telemarketing , and spam . no ? from what i understood . yes , yes . what do you think of all this ? well , it , it bothers me , above all , the spam in the e mail . no ? in the , in the e mail . because , well , i work on the computer a lot , and , i receive a lot of information via email , and every day i get a lot of JJ mail no ? ads , from , i do n't know , who want to sell you NNS , or want to VB you directly , and this bothers me a lot . aha , hmm . like , in this sense , i 'm JJ . aha . and where do you come from ? ah , how interesting . yes , yes , yes . and you ? ah . oh , yes ? yes yes i really like spain . me too yes , oh yes , i , nowadays , oh , they are so JJ but with time , you do , one does , you get protected . oh , to me , in the past , i 'd get lots of calls like everybody else but here , here in this phone service , they have a service in which you can , just most of people do n't even know it exists , in which , in fact , it 's like a NN that blocks JJ calls . mhm . oh , yes , that does exist ? oh , i did n't know . oh , i see , i see , i see . so , to me , if they call me and say this person is calling you do you want to take the call or not ? i understand but it 's not for the , oh , i do n't mind , if i 'm going to the telephone i do n't care who it is , what stops it is that these companies usually do everything through machines . because they do n't know how to answer . sure , sure , sure . mm , no , that 's a smart system . because , you do n't lose calls that could be important . but , but yes , exactly , eh , what gets me mad , is when the machine comes out . right ? because , if a person comes out and you can VB , well , you can still tell them something , but when the machine comes out , is very annoying , really . and , and is not the person who VBZ the numbers , mm , mm but a machine that VBZ the number . and , and then , when there 's someone available , then they get on the phone to talk . mm . sure . sure , and , and do you get a lot of advertising through the mail ? yes , yes , because you throw that away and that 's it , right ? mm , mm yes , you throw it away and , done , yes . um , eh , the others , the others are more annoying . as far as spam , what one ends up doing , yes , is difficult to avoid sending you spam . its a true sin right ? i wonder if anyone buys these things they offer . i like to VB without reading for the time lost i like when stopped the offers . sure . yes , yes , yes , yes . yes , is that , also , since it cost absolutely nothing to send an e mail . and , you can have an JJ system that sends an email to millions of people in a second , so , so , sure . is , is hard to fight against it , and , also , since is very easy to hide your identity in the internet and be very JJ , go after this people legally , also , well , is a job is , is an important job right ? and it cost yes . and , what it 's happening , is that as they put stronger laws in the united states , they are moving the NNS to other countries . yes , and , sure , yes , yes , yes . and that 's always going to exist , countries that do n't care about VBG that . mm , and have you been many years here in the united states ? yes , i 've been here many years , i came as a child , yes , from cuba , yes . yes , and and what part of spain are you from ? i 'm from barcelona . ah , how nice . i was in barcelona many years ago , and i liked it a lot . i have it very near right ? my house and , and , well , my city , a but , well . aha , you miss barcelona a lot ? yes , well , i mean , i 'm fine here , but , is not the same . barcelona . and , aha . no , is not the same . are you here in the university ? those type of things . yes , yes , and are you a student at penn ? but , well , yes yes , yes . um , i 'm doing a doctorate here . mm , of linguistic , precisely . yes , yes , yes . well , i do n't have it very clear what it is . but , but , of linguistic . how interesting , yes . and how , eh , eh , philadelphia , what do you think of it ? and is not that is super nice , for maybe tourism , but i find it pleasant . and , i do n't know , you have new york nearby , mm . ah , definitely more ah , to live , and the rent and that , yes . and how many years are you going to be there ? well , that depends , depends , um , they 're five , a doctorate program . ah . mm . well , i have some friends that were in , in cuba this summer . oh , and what did you think of it ? well , they 'd tell me that they like the country a lot , that it is super beautiful , really beautiful , but what , well , they were surprised , no ? about the lack of certain things there and oh , the lack of freedom , is n't it ? for the people , they ca n't do this , they ca n't do that , they treat NNS differently than their own people , is n't it ? that there is like mhm . even , oh , they even have different transportation and stuff like that , yes , yes , yes . so , what oh , that 's it . well , they came back , they were surprised , no ? but they really thought it was a beautiful and the people were quite nice . mhm . mhm , mhm . the conditions under which people live there . yes , it 's like , how would you VB the current politics in spain ? well , man , i 'm so happy about the political change that we just had about a year ago and mm , i do n't know , the situation was , it was so JJ , and before the NN NNS , it was very , it was complicated and then the JJ attack just made it all worse . the what ? oh , the NN NNS made it all , mm , oh , yes , mhm . i do n't know , they created more NN and then , well , the political change took place and now , well , the NNPS are in the government now and and i do n't know , i 'm quite happy about that , very , very much . i do n't know , the problem with the terrorism from the basque country , seems to be VBG its end . what kind of solution ? well , they are talking about , even right now , leaving the NNS , well , i mean there is no oh , really ? serious NN yet , but it has been said that there have been conversations between the government and NNP . and it will probably take a long time but , at least , i do n't know , it has been a long long time without NNS , or NNS , and the situation seems to be a little more mm more relaxed , i do n't know . also , other NNS have been taken , i do n't know , quite , mm , like the gay marriage , and things like this . i find them alright . so , i am , i am happy with and , how is the economy ? of JJ , of NNS ? hello , good night , good night , how , how are you ? fine and you ? i 'm carmen in chicago , and you are ? oh , NNP from texas okay , do you know today 's subject ? yes , yes okay , oh , oh , should i start or should you ? oh , as you wish , yes okay oh , i 'm going to begin then okay look , i get calls from the company aha offering me NNS of five minutes of long distance calls aha they also call me , oh , who is in charge of this phone ? i 'm supposed to be the one aha but i VBP that i 'm not at home , that i 'm not , that the owner is not at the house , that she gets back at nine in the evening so that they stop bothering me . mhm and that 's it , after nine o'clock in the evening i know they wo n't call until the next day when they start calling ah , and oh , so the next day when they start calling again , well what i do is that i let the machine take the calls . mhm when i get home from work , my machine is full of messages , the mm the call NN is full of messages oh , one time , a telephone company changed me to another company without my NN oh , wow so i had a problem with them mh they call me sometimes , so when they call me i do n't pay attention to them , they tell me that i have won a NN but i know where i 've participated to win things , so i do n't listen to them mhm , mhm , i get telemarketing calls every four or five days but since i never answer them , they do n't bother me mhm , did n't you put your number in the , the do not call list ? yes , yes , i did but they keep on calling me really ? yes , and how long , how long ago did you registered your number there ? so , oh , when the order came out saying that we could register them aha ah , i put it and you have n't tried to put it again ? no , because i had the same problem , i aha ah , first i just had a cellular aha and then i moved and my cellular did n't have good NN so i decided ah , put a phone from the house and i had the same problem and i registered my number aha and after thirty days nobody called me again , nobody has called me again aha ah . well i already did it once , this time i have n't done it but since i do n't worry because the machine is what answers aha , yes and since when , an example , you call me and you know that the machine answers mm it means that i do n't want to answer the phone , you are not going to call me again mm but they keep calling yes , yes i also receive a lot of letters in the mail of mm of credit cards of NNS for NN mm i do n't pay attention to it , what i do is that i break it the spam does n't bother me because i do n't use the computer for anything . mm then i asked here , but yes i asked my daughter what she wanted and she said told me that she VBZ up to fifty spam emails mm and what she does is she VBZ it for example , she ah , something interest her to not have the email full mm then ah , i also receive many letters of insurance , life insurance from banks to see if i want to become a NN but yes since i do n't answer the letters either , what i do is that i VBD them mm because i 'm scared that someone will steal my identity sure yes , because they have the address there . and , and things , sometimes they send me things ah , mm personal letters to me mm and what i do is that , since it does n't interest me , i VBD them really VBD because i already know two or three people eh , who have had their identity VBN aha , yes that 's the very reason because what the letters do is that they break them once mh and there they throw them to the trash can mh and they are not worried that there is people JJR than one mh that steal their identity and then how will you do to yes , no , it 's a problem yes , yes to VB that you are that person mhm it 's a lot ah , danger because of that yes , i never , never ok now i will let you speak of all the times that they have called you , have you ever decided to buy any of the products that they have offered yes , ah , i have bought things ah , once i bought some shoes mhm and they turned out to be too small and i lost the money i lost the shoes because i could n't exchange them either mh but lately i have bought things like for the kitchen to cook , NNS mh ah , like but , on television or on the phone ? on the phone not on television , aha no , mh ahh , well i i have never bought anything , eh , i mean aha if my phone company calls me or maybe another phone company and i did n't even understand that they had a better offer aha ah , yes for calling long distance for example , well i think that aha one time or another i have changed my my service but aha since well my number , ah and they started calling me to my cell phone too aha ah , about NNS , that i had NN a trip or something like that and , and i VBP registered my cell phone number in that in that list that the government has on the internet so that they do n't call you and since that moment aha they have not called me again , so i have n't had any other NN oh , wow , aha but , but i think that the government should have eh , make laws that are JJ aha , aha , aha so that , they ca n't call the people like that because there are people that receive NNS of calls yes , per month and is a problem because there are many people that then have to buy , like you have to buy a call , a NN of , a machine , aha , aha , a machine aha , they have to VB money and there are people that ca n't VB the money in those type of things , then they have to be answering the phone all the time aha , aha , aha , aha . and there are many times that , there are people that are JJ and that they call them and lie to them and many people fall for ah , aha the lies and spend a lot of money well just yesterday they gave in the news here in chicago a lady that they called her on the phone , that she had won a trip to puerto rico ah , aha and that someone was going to go to her house for her to give them one hundred dollars , the person who called her told her mm he said look i 'm going to send a guy who 's like this , this , give him one hundred dollars he will give you some tickets , the tickets to puerto rico and later you have to send seven hundred dollars mm ah , when we send you the NN and she said , but i have n't applied anywhere to win those tickets mm that if she does n't open her eyes uh um i would have lost eight hundred dollars in a NN uh um but the person , so i said , the person was saying on tv , the lady said , oh , we have your social security number , we have your address , your name , and she said '' ¿you have my social security number ? , tell me '' um '' i want to know where did i wrote my social security number '' , and when she said that , the person hung up '' uh um it was to see if the lady said `` oh '' , my social security number is this , this , this uh huh to , to catch her uh but the lady was RBR , she told her `` ¿what do you mean you have my social security number ? , tell me so i can now '' uh huh and when she said that , the person hung up yes that 's why if you , if you do n't pay attention when they 're talking to you on the phone , you give information that they 'll use it for anything uh huh , yes you have to be very careful too yes , yes there are many people that have not been as smart as that lady and they have given information to people , they have lost lots of money yes , yes , yes like right now with what happened with katrina mhm well lots of people is VBG with that money yes , mhm because they are taking other people , they take the papers to them as if they 're VBN to collect money mh mh and because the people do n't know what 's going on they mh they give them money and when they go to ask no , no , we have n't sent anybody to collect money mh because we 're receiving money in an institution and we 're not sending people door to door mh but there 's a lot , ah , many people that are very JJ yes , that if you do n't open your eyes mh they , they take everything away mh one has to know who to give one 's information to and one ca n't be giving personal information by phone because there are lots of people that are very RB the problem is that there are also some companies that can sell the information you give right right , like , uh , and companies that you would n't think they 're doing that right companies that sell products and stuff like that , and when you give them your address and your social security number and all that , they 're valid companies , but they have the right to sell that information to other companies so they can call you but , imagine that and i think that the government should cancel that , because yes , yes , yes , because it 's very annoying when they call your phone , there , there , there yes , yes and , and trying to sell you things right , um that you , that you do n't want yes , yes , yes , it happened to me once , my credit card , which i 've had for many years right they called me and they talk about in ways you do n't understand what they 're saying right , right and i understood the told me she was going to send me a product , and i would , for my credit card and that i could try it for thirty days and after that , if i did n't want it right they would , they would call me to ask if i wanted to keep the product or if i wanted to cancel it right and they never called me , and i thought that they 'd VB it , and after they sent me the bill aha for the product . this is on my credit card , and i called them , and i told them that i did n't understand what they had told me that they were going to call to ask me if i wanted to continue the service aha and , and the told me that , that they had told me really clearly . that i had to call to cancel the service . wow and this , that like and american express that , that 's a company that aha , aha that 's really established and that does n't commit NN but even like this when the call you and tell you so quickly aha , aha and it 's so you ca n't understand what they're aha saying , and so , they benefit from you not understanding yes , yes , yes and there are companies who are all responsible too , there are times that they do anything to keep taking money from people aha , aha hmm that if you 're not aware yes , mhm yes , one must not trust all the companies , yes yes yes , and to me , this telephone company changed my company , and when i received my telephone bill mhm i see that it 's another company , and i say that the only one that is JJ to change my company is me . mhm i was in puerto rico , i was not here mhm my daughter was going to pay the bill and when she told me that they changed the company , she said mom they changed your company , i came , when i came to puerto rico i went to the company and i told them and they said that yes , i had given the NN to change companies , i said how could i have given the NN if i have VBN that i was in puerto rico mhm and and it 's supposed that you did n't , that you no , what is it ? that i do n't allow anyone change my company . mhm but they changed it , i do n't know how they did it but they changed my company mhm and also they come to me by the phone , a lot of calls from mexico , from ah , yes and i say who is making these calls to me , if i do n't make calls to anywhere , the only mhm good evening , this is joe good evening , my name is NNP , NNP , NNP NNP ? yes how are you NNP ? fine , and you ? fine , where are you calling from ? from NNP , new mexico oh , i call from colorado , denver colorado . so , the subject for tonight , like they said , is telemarketers and how they VBP you on the phone and the internet do you connect the internet often ? oh , yes , yes , mm , specially to study . oh yes , to look for NNS for the classes of my , my yes , what are you studying ? pardon ? what are you studying ? mm , NN oh , good and spanish , as well yes . i am also studying . now i am old , i keep studying . mm , i am studying to finish a NN in commercial administration oh , that 's fine , that 's fine and , how are things over there ? well i have n't talked to you before ? i think that we had already talked or something like that . and i had talked with someone from , from NNP not too long ago . well yes , well , perhaps , because i 've only talked one time , just one time ? one other time . oh really ? yes . oh . one time only . and , do they bother you a lot with telephone calls , selling you things ? well , me not so much , but it does bother me a little . yes but , my father , well he VBZ people like that . yes , i yes , i , i do n't like it too much because they call at bad times although here in colorado they have JJR laws as far as that . if one gets on a list they are not supposed to call you and bother you but yes in the internet , they do send one a lot of things , right ? when one i do n't know if it 's happened to you sometime that you 've opened a NN of something that sounds interesting , suddenly you start getting a lot of other things , of advertising things like that . that has n't happened to you ? yes , yes , well when you are on the internet , and apparently , and well , yes , well yes . it makes you crazy when those things come so , one day , when i went on vacations from work , because i use the internet at work , it is part of my work , i was on vacations , and for two weeks , and when i came back i had more than four thousand five hundred emails four that were four thousand five hundred four thousand five hundred , yes , and most of them were garbage . yes , it is like that . imagine that . and the bad thing is that i could not press NN to all as there were many important NNS between the , those that were garbage . and i have a hard time checking them all . and there well for example , like the school , for example , you are always looking for economical aid , so they share scholarship or something like that , right ? ah , yes , that is true , also . if you fill something of that , suddenly many of those people share that information with other companies . and the it begin to appear a huge amount of things of all kinds . i bought my house yes . and you do get a lot of telemarketing things in the regular mail ? yes , yes , of mortgage rate , like that of yes , yes . i had a house also and well when i got divorced , well it went to my JJ wife but my name is still in , in the , in the system , as if my name was there . then i get many things like that of NN , that if i need money , i can go to this company or that and , and , how long do you have to finish your career ? ah , well i have like five years left , also i 'm going for a master , in the ah , so good . in the , what is it called , administration ? yes yes , or an NNP , ¿right ? yes , yes , that 's my JJ goal , to get my NNP too , and do you have good [ ] there ? , ¿what university are you VBG there or VBG to ? oh , the university of new mexico NNP ? , that 's the one that yeah yeah , that 's , that 's good , very good , and ¿do you go there physically or on the internet too ? physically now , uh , i have taken classes on the internet , but not on this semester , no you 're going only for . . . ¿how many credits are you taking right now ? right now i have like nineteen class hours , i mean nineteen credits , something like that , ¿right ? , like yes four , six classes ¿and are you taking six classes at once ? yes wow , that 's tough yes and , ¿do you have a family ? i have a daughter yeah ? , me too and i have , well , my parents live here too yes , but helps her a lot , with the school , with the time . well yes . how nice . they help me , what a blessing . it 's very good that you have the help and the support of the family . yes yes , my NN . here i am and my daughter who 's five years old and well yes , she VBZ me a lot and i , and i feel happy that she understands my , the situation and quite mature to be five years old . she has a lot of understanding of the issues . yes , is true . mine , mine is also five years old , and is like she already knows everything and that 's how it is . yes . but i also do n't want for it to be very , that she gets too involved . but many people do that and like they spend the whole time in front of the computer , and that 's not good . yes . ah , i work the whole day in front of a computer , and , hm , part well yes , if you work in that yes . you get home and and , no , and do n't want to do something else . yes . ah yes . i mean , and later it comes out more expensive for you . yes . and have you gotten the ones from , from india , that already , already many , many many companies have their , um , it VBD their telephone NNS there in , there in india . the people talk very very very strange , right ? i , the NN , the one i have from school NNP which has the NNP , and has VBN and all those yes . i had problems with the NN , because it gave me problems with the NNP . then i called and everyone i would talk to was from india . and then , and with the accent very hard , very hard the accent and is very hard to understand them , right ? yes , the accent yes . and i was trying to understand him and and , nothing , i had , in a , one time i was seriously like four hours on the phone so they would fix my NN on the computer because something was wrong with the NN and i was crazy and there and after they call to see if everything was good and i told them no , it was n't good when i have to be four hours on the phone , that 's not good at all . it was horrible . i still remember that and i had to do it because it was from the school and i depend a lot on those NNS working well . this for the school helps me a lot . then , and , do you use the computer a lot for school ? to VB the programs and that ? yes . more to write my trials and , well some , some classes , like give , um , exams and tests , no , on the computer . have , have you heard of , of , um NNP , is like is like a , some NNS that the teachers use to give exams and what is called , pardon ? NNP is like a NNP ? yes ah , how interesting . is like the , the for , take those exams there ? yes , just think that well last semester i took a NN class yes . and they gave me well , all my , my test through , through the , the internet and how do you VB it , the NNP , how do you say it ? to check it . um NNP s , no , NNP , NNP NNP , NNP what sorry ? NNP of , ah , NN , and t of NNP NNP , NN NNP oh , okay eh , i 'm going to check it out to see but yes , some yes , some things , for example i 'm taking some it classes and then i have to take one of those exams , and in one of those places ah yes then there i take the exams to , to do the NN also . there that well that wants to finish their master , that 's wonderful . yes . and how long do you think it will take to finish ? i i think that if i do , do well and do n't VB any classes well hello . hello ? hello , how are you ? fine , fine . my name 's auria . jose , where are you from , jose ? from philadelphia . ah , i 'm in atlanta . yes . ah , and what do you do in atlanta ? well it 's really hot . well here it does n't get cold until JJ november or december sometimes the cold does n't start . ah , and a lot of humidity i imagine , right ? yes . even if i 'm used to the humidity , i 'm from puerto rico and i like humidity . yes , but . and what do you think about telemarketing and on the phone mm . bothering . i always put my home telephone number because i live in the university and that 's why i never receive calls or anything so and the thing that my mom in the house has a program through the telephone company that if someone calls from a phone that is not VBN i mean that it does n't give its identity or number , the number is VBN yes . then is perfect because my mom already hardly ever VBZ calls to the house number , she does n't receive calls i do n't receive calls and already everyone is happy , right ? yes . well eh , yes , and and with the spam is terrible because if one gives the number , one 's email on the internet they eat you up there already , they can throw away that address oh , forget about that . yes , that 's why i have more that one email account then when i 'm searching for information but i do n't know the website too much mm . the spam e mail yes . yes . and my mom also that now of of um but it was in spanish and it was NN mail at JJ dot com or something like that they go from one website to another . looking for e mail NNS . yes . but at then end , you VBP but i i 'm like ah , like now yes . but they say that supposedly the cell phones they will jump them for the telemarketers yes . and i say to myself . they find many phone numbers in the phone book . and none of the cell phones . in truth they do n't show up in NNS . because the NNS , i do n't think so , right ? before well they did n't let cell phone companies do it but i read an NN that now they will let them sell it if they want . but this alone companies do . eh , what a thing . and i was VBG the car through them , they sold my name in a lot of companies . so i saw an apartment and i received offers that were going to pay me one hundred thousand dollars for the mortgage that i have , and i do n't even have this . that yes , yes . no but , and what company was this ? sorry ? the one that sold it . what company was it that sold your number ? NNP what 's it called ? the NN company of NNP ah . because i VBD the car through them . i did n't go to any other bank . and later they started to but by mail at least , not by calls . but uh uh . yes . that . and since nobody else had my parent 's house since i lived there , well it had to have been NNP . many , has to respect the NN too the exactly . that 's what i say . the calls do n't bother me so much yes . and because of that it is supposed to do it , but they do not . and then is when they keep calling that it bothers me but for then they have sold the number yet . to another person . ah . and it would . therefore it is like . hmm . ah yes . sometimes two or three times a day , call him . obviously he is not interested and they could call others clients or other people that that i have a that are interested , right ? yes , but they think that eventually you can get tired of the calls and simply say yes to get out of that or something like that they think yes and it is like they say , there is someone after all who says yes . hmm . but the thing is that as i told you i worked telemarketing for two months when i was at the university and i know that it is a law that once they tell you take me off the list and do n't call me back , they are supposed to do it , and if they do n't do it , there 's a fine of ten thousand dollars . by the NNP and in general the but what happens is that no one the majority of the people do n't know about that and do n't know the NNS that are necessary to report the company mm , and in general the telemarketers take the people off if they are supposed to , some do it but other companies like american express do n't do it . if you tell them yes ? mm . and your company in general did it or ? the NNP company yes . no , no the company where you worked for telemarketing mm . they ca n't say , i 'm not interested and hang up because they call you back . yes . mm . uh uh clients as someone that could n't be called so and it was a NN that if they bought a new list and that person already appeared in the new list uh uh the NN could check the name and know that they could n't just call this person like they wanted . and they put on a block . well because i i know that you call this NN free number and you VBP and then i suppose that they take you off all the NNS hmm . but have you already been on it ? has it worked well ? well , i do n't know because like i told you i have a cell phone so i have n't had problems with telemarketers hmm . so i have n't had to VB . but supposedly now there is going to be a JJ free number for people with cell phones to VB in too , because like i said they 're going to VB the cell numbers . i did n't know if it had turned out well of if they kept calling these people , nothing in the news because much of the news got something and so they put it on for several days and so then recently it VBD , right . you never see it anymore . so i hi , my name is gloria . how are you ? good , and you ? ok , i , eh , i really did n't understand what he said , i know that we are , ah , NN to talk about telemarketing . yes , about telemarketing , and about spam . of the , eh , what ? of the what ? spam . oh , the spam , oh , that 's what i VBP ah , ok , ok , ok of , of the internet . yes . yes . almost always illegal , or i do n't know . from doing your work that you 're supposed to do . anyway , now you speak a bit , because i do n't know what to say . it is one , eh , one of these , its is NNP , well i have several , and NNP aha and of those i have a JJR aha of NN mail , of spam aha , aha and there go all the NNS , and honestly it has a NN that works really well , because really ? yes , because there are very few spam e NNS that reach the , the , the NN oh , so you have a block y eh yes . so a block , something to block them , from you yes , it VBZ them oh , NNS , you see i have that , you know , i have that . but yes i can VB in to my email i can use it because my little boy plays with the computer mhm i believe that NNS the computer too well , it depends what game it is , but then yes . so where are you from ? excuse me yes what country are you from ? from spain . oh , from spain , oh okay . so , i 'm VBG the spanish . because , i 'm JJ . i was born in puerto rico , but i grew up he and the , the calls on , hmm , on the telephone , to try to sell you something , what do you think ? but i help them , you know , i tell them , no , i 'm not interested . so , sometimes they VBP you , sometimes some of them and , and they talk badly to you . but , ah yeah ? normally , i talk really well to them because i , i did this for a time . so , i find that , it 's really hard to do this . aha . and it was an interview where they VBD to you what it was like , and after , it 's a hard job , really , because you 're there for many hours , aha . aha . and there , and talk with people who , well , who tell you they 're not interested , aha . oh . yes , yes , yes , yes to treat the , the NN . right ? exactly , one has to take everything they tell you with a , with a NN . you know , with a NN . but , that , that job , was VBG . but , you know what ? the more people you call , if you have an NN , like me who was calling through the insurance of , of yes . it made it easier . then , they would talk to me . but , if you did n't speak spanish , like they did n't want anything to do with you . i do n't know if it 's because they did n't understand me , or , and i aha . also speaks the same language , like they already have something in common that , that wins you over , that how do you say it ? VBZ , NN , well , with the other person , and aha , aha , and that 's why i think they VBP better . yes , i think you are right , yes . so , then , they would put me in the hispanic community , so , each , lets say that , every fifty calls yes . oh , yes , well , that 's what i was VBG about because , well , i , e i , all of it , everyone i talked to , aha . everyone i 've spoken to , all of them told me that they had never bought anything or been interested in buying stuff through the phone . and i was like , but , they must sell something , right , or they would n't get any NNS yes , aha . they do n't earn , they do n't because lots of those jobs are through NN , you know , they pay you if you sell things . five hundred pesos per week , yes , yes , yes , if i can , t i 'd have to get lots and lots of people . lots , it was impossible , and sometimes you ca n't sometimes , the people , lots of them have answering machines . so , it was difficult for them to call you back , some would n't pick up the phone , it was VBG , i thought it was . and , now i work in the school . yes , i know , i know but , it VBZ , it VBZ , some people are lucky . is the one you have , like , there are many books that you can study ah , really ? then , if your voice is you know that sometimes when they call you , they talk very fast , yes , extremely , yes . sometimes they put you to sleep , they put you to sleep , and you buy . really . in other words , that is the NN ? because , i laugh , i mean , but well it seems that , that they know they have very little time , because i 'm going to hang up , and they want to say everything possible in such little time . if you do n't convince the NN in a minute , no , no , you do n't sell anything . so , in that minute , you have to make your , your NN . sure , sure . but , anyway , is that , i think that the majority of the people , do n't care , they are not listening , really , they are not even hearing , what you are saying i know , i know , i know . because , i , in school , when i work in the school and the people call , they already start to talk fast . i have this problem , and i tell them , wait a minute , i need your name , because , at work , they do call a lot . in the school . yes . and have you put your , your phone on the list of , on the list of , that there is for of do not call . yes , you know that i worked in an agency that does that , that writes the name so they do n't call , and they still call . and , they say that now , they say that now , they are trying to call you on the cellular , that that it says it cost you a call . yes , sure . and , and are they also calling the , the ? cellulars , yes . if i do n't know the number , i do n't get it . it could , yes , exactly . so , you never know , you know . so , aha . aha . ah , okay . they do n't charge me when they call me . why are they going to charge me when the call my cell phone ? aha . i know , i know . it 's all this . if you do n't read the , the small things that the write in the contract , make , are VBN uh huh NNP paid , you can pay for it JJ yes anyway , so i , i 'm trying to cook , so , uh right ¿what else ? , but i buy a lot over the internet , on the internet , i buy lots of stuff yeah , but not from the e VBZ they send to you , but when no , no , no , no , but , uh , um , sometimes i 'm afraid , you know , to put your card number , because you never know like people say yeah , you have to be careful , yeah yes , they 're connected i only put it on websites that right that i trust , which are few , i mean aha . no , no , i mean , i never go to a little JJ page , of someone that 's selling something , there , small . it scares me , so . because , even if it 's a JJ NN , and the number is not lost on the internet , exactly , yes . and , they keep on sending you things , to see if you fall . yes , yes , yes . but , well . and you ? i am , m david , how are you ? hello , fine fine fine , with whom am i speaking ? what 's your name ? david , yes , night to meet you , how are you ? david , mayra , nice to meet you , fine , where are you talking from ? i 'm calling from connecticut ah yes , and where are you from ? yes , i 'm american , i was born in brooklyn , new york seriously , great , you speak really well yes you speak really and you , where do you come from ? i 'm from mexico but i 'm in philadelphia ah yes in philadelphia yes i study here oh , okay , are you studying in the college or are you ? hmm , sorry ? are you in college ? yes , in the third year , junior yes , oh you are a junior , oh that 's cool now , hmm , and what do you do ? i 'm a NN more or less mm okay yes i have some friends you know my NNS since i have a NN are mexicans mm all i have like four , five guys that work with me okay mm from your country and like that like that , where did you learn spanish ? i learned by force because since i was born here in the united states mm ah you know i started to speak in spanish to tell you after seventeen years alright okay my parents are puerto rican but were born here mm then the spanish that i learned is from the street more or less from my friends and from my wife who comes from ecuador okay , okay and like that little by little there learning the language how nice and what else and i do n't know what the topic today was of marketing i never understand what the recording says it 's terrible this is what i ca n't understand because the recording does n't come out well . yes because i think it was telemarketing like if you 're on the list or not in the list , they still call or something like that but at least you know for the phone ten minutes and you do n't answer yes anyway with , with what you heard in the the fisher of the , eh , the fisher so there 's a , i think that the main office is at the university so there i found some NNS from last time ah that there was another NN like two years ago and so i participated in these and then they told me that there was this one in spanish ah , the other one was in english , no ? so yes they were english or in various other languages too yes , ah yes , aha so if you were someone who spoke spanish or chinese for example or NNP they payed you more oh yes aha but that 's it if you were lucky and knew someone and this is the only band thing , that they always call me when i 'm eating or going to sleep hmm yes me too , this is why now i started to call , i 'm doing the calls when i can ah yes because i do n't know how long it will last i think there 's nothing more we can do twenty , five calls , no ? but they pay you more and from here like i know that while you talk more yes they pay you more for the calls oh no so aha so since i do n't know how long this call has lasted , better the NN sure and i wait for the call when i can ah because besides my phone is always ringing , it 's a NN can , so i go without answering and they talk to me each half hour so better yes but they call me , they call me and when the other time when i answered the phone , then i put in the NN number hmm and the call left ah seriously everything and yeah so i say , okay , okay , ah the person said your number is this the other , i said the number and they said that 's it , and hung up okay how strange yes but you know it 's like it was late , it was like nine thirty more or less hmm like the other year when they called me it was like a little white NN , a NNP there who started to VB on the telephone why i was calling at night i do n't have anything to do i i did n't call you you signed , you put your name on the list and they are calling you i did n't call you then like one mm getting out of that list that if the other that he got so mad , all mad and he hung up on me okay well so you know eh is how it is , then how many years have you been here in the country ? i 've been in the country two years well i 'm on my third yes barely and i 'm living here alone in philadelphia ah yes , wow mm well with friends from the university sure , aha my family was in mexico and they just moved to texas to san antonio ah yes the other time i was talking with a lady from san antonio mm yes , there is yes i was asking her if there is a bunch but she says that will all the people that moved from the hurricanes that passed that san antonio is getting very bad ah really aha she says that a lot of fights with the people from high school ah with the kids from there from the is that is must be very hard VBG everything right now yeah it is a problem is that if you don´t see it on tv hmm all latins , no the people are poor and have they are very JJ and they want all for nothing you think that NN should hmm because they don´t have a house to live in but they knew about the NN but yes yes yes they stayed and that´s what happened okay , ah how good i have not could talk to yeah have you been here for just two years ? pardon me ? hmm just you have just two years here , how do you like it ? i like it it is fine i have not get used to the weather , it is very cold yes yes but which part . which part of mexico are you from , there in mexico city i do not understand about mexico city then hmm then the summer is hot but not to much NN aha , of course and the winter is cool instead of here that summer is horrible , is humid and it is very hot and after that there is cold all the time hmm so i have not get used but it is fine i am liking it more as times goes and know more the city and people and VBP i like everything more of course , ah you have to , is nothing more than nothing more than in california there is my uh , in miami , miami has more or less the same weather yes , i do n't know there , but i think i should right , there are great little things over there , oh , very cheap yes and it 's all miami , it 's miami university college , miami state university , miami florida , yes florida , yes , university of florida and everything yeah , they have everything , but it 's all schools , so , you know , you have to get to know it , it 's very cool you should study , yes look , if you 're latino , everybody speaks spanish there , everybody speaks spanish uh huh , uh huh so , i do n't know , i do n't know , i don't ok , ok because everyone can communicate over the phone so , what do you want to talk about , i mean , what do you want to talk about , what do you want to talk about well , i do n't , know , uh , how long uh , ¿where in connecticut do you live ? VB again ? , i 'm sorry , ¿what was that ? ¿where do you live ? i live in connecticut , uh , on new NNP i do n't know if you oh , new NNP , and , ¿have you always lived there ? right , no , i have lived , i used to live in new york , uh , outside the bronx , more or less , i lived over there by the city uh huh , uh huh , i like new york a lot too , it VBZ me a lot of mexico city then that yes , ah yes , in fact and since is like that is very JJ there 's a lot of energy and everything is happening and i like to go there yes in the city is very dangerous mm i mean it depends what part if you go by manhattan , manhattan is very cool , okay yes there are many there many people from different countries mm then well to VB to see the people because there are many crazy people that walk in the streets you know yes that too eh yes i mean i 've also been lucky because i 've only been in manhattan yes and once i went into the bronx and queens by accident but nothing happened mm oh then you are driving or you come by bus what ? driving or in in in no in bus oh yes ah is cool but you know yes you have to know hmm but that that time is delayed for here for philadelphia to manhattan it 's only like two hours , besides there 's , hmm , there 's a bus that is n't the NNP , but the chinese do it yes oh yes yes yes so you go from NNP to NNP right , right , right and it only costs ten dollars it 's really cheap oh that 's not so bad then hmm yes so many times we just go to new york every week end and yeah oh , that 's NN but little by little , so how is it going at school well yes , i study chemical engineering what are you VBG , oh yeah so hmm , it 's a little bit heard , and it 's getting more difficult yeah i 've just starting , yes , i 'm just feeling , how difficult it will be yeah yeah but you can change your major , no ? yes but this is my third year yeah so i 've been taking engineering classes and science since i entered and now well , yeah better , i think it 's worth more to finish ah ah , but will you one are you thinking of staying here or do you return later to mexico i do n't know i do n't want to return to mexico yet , i want to return but after several years sure and in the united states i like it but i do n't love it so i am thinking it 's better to work for a couple of years or study a masters or something m m and then go to europe or some other country it seems to me that it would be nicer to live in another country i do n't know NNP or something like that , some other thing yes , eh you know in london is the same , more or less as in manhattan , london yes , yes and it 's the same as in manhattan the the it has the same , it has a times NNP , you have buses eh all but you know only there is , there are not so many hispanics there no there 's not many here , it 's only only whites more , more or less whites and i know and english knows speak much english , by force ah well yes i say i have been here before and i did my high school in english aha two years so i have been speaking english for about four years aha and well now now i 'm used to it , i still have an accent and there are some words that i do n't know sure but there 's not so much difference now , i 'm not so bad ah that 's cool but but little by little you learn more or less mhm , yes and the friendships , you begin to practice with your friends and that way you learn the words that they are not going to teach you in school you know little by little but it made me happy that you like the united states , and you are going , it 's that all the young people of yours come here to work because the , the mexicans , all the mexicans that i know they like to work very hard and save their holidays and take them to their country and then never return . well if not , i believe that if they return , many return , or they use them there and it 's in relation to working more no , well , it 's not if , but , no , it 's not so easy to return again . no , it 's not so now like , like we are at war , eh closed the NNS , then the people who are here , already here , ca n't go back or else they have to stay but it 's the problem i have , my friends here mm . but he does not speak english well and has his two children that were born here and just barely bought a house okay well he said he was going back that he has property that he has a house that he was VBG money to go back and is sorry he bought his house here . but does n't want to return right now because it 's not the same so well yes , but you know that if you always miss it , or i mean , it 's not easy to live here because you work hard and live well yes of course or i mean , even though , even though you may be working in a mcdonald 's you can live instead in mexico you work RB hard , but enough money , but you always miss it , it 's a very different lifestyle and i really miss the people and everything NN , no if i went , i have gone to mexico twice mm , ah okay where yes , i went to NNP and i went to mexico city okay oh hello ? NNP hello ? NNP hello ? aha . who is it ? eh , eh , i 'm NNP . NNP ? yes NNP i think that we talked before , the , the first time that i talked . aha . anyways , i did n't understand the , the topic . about telemarketing you mean ? something like that , about telemarketing , eh , well hmmm . eh , buying on , um , the internet , or on the telephone ? i only heard telemarketing . the thing that is telemarketing oh . hmm . hmm . well yes . my son works doing telemarketing i also used to work in telemarketing . then , what did you use to do ? he is from virginia yes oh i called him once oh , okay well , yeah my son has worked for two different companies , selling magazines hm mm oh , okay the second time i don´t remember but he didn´t like it very much okay it was the company because they used to treat him like a little baby oh , okay so there is many people hm mm . well , they try to control him hm mm and you know they try to make you sell you know in one hour you have to sell five and things like that . mm . if you do n't sell five , because i , what i did before was of newspaper ? aha . and then , what is it called , and if you did n't sell seven per hour , mm . they would VB the , what i VBD per hour , oh , mm . i said , mm , okay , the salary ? sorry . ah ? they said , they say sorry eh i do n't think this job is for you , or something like that . mm . look , is very , JJ ? hm mm there are many people that , leave , because of that because they ca n't , work in that , in that , in that type of job . aha . because , they make it too JJ , and , and yeah . eh they always come with NNS , and , and , aha . you know , and , and yeah , is true eh and there are , are people that , let 's say , in an hour can sell seven NNS , or whatever but the following hour they are VBG up on you , they VBP at you . and they , or they VBP at you hm mm . well , and now , is many times because they said that , that now , eh , up to a certain hour of the day , they can be calling . hm mm . after , i think seven , i do n't know what time it is , they ca n't call your house at dinner time . yes . then , now they are saying of the cellular phones . that , that now they will be , will be calling the cellulars aha . then , there is a , an internet address that one can go to , to put their number , name , something like that , so that they do n't call you . a , a number but is in the united states , yes . yes . hm mm , well yes . the stores . so there 's a lot of , NN service . for the , for the people is the , you know , that the attitude of the NNS , so to speak . because i work in a store , and , and and sometimes , i , tell them something and they take it the wrong way and , and they think that i am that that they 're lying in life or something and i aha . but it what what i said , because she got mad and i do n't know , you know sorry if she got mad eh , aha , you know , it 's that yeah when they go , they get mad , and after they tell the NN NNP so , one time they said it , and , and called my attention and said , but this , they told me , so , that aha . aha , and i did n't have anything with anyone . aha . aha . her more than , they want to find out what happened . but the majority of the times they are , on the side of the workers . hm mm . okay aha . aha . then , since the NNS sometimes get , they get like , you were working in the store , you have to find them this , and you have to do this for them , and you know aha . yeah and then , mm , but here , this , all this , NN service the majority of the things . yes , hm mm but always , more or less , one has to do something with the clients . but well yes , hm mm and what else did they say ? shopping eh , buying online ? eh , eh , something like that i understood . is that he , since he has that strong accent , i do n't understand him aha , and , is true . i hardly understand him . do n't you see . i know that i know that it 's the , the number , ah how was it . no , that you had to put the code , and and plus the , the sign of i do n't know who . but is the , that one that 's on the phone to your right , on NN with the zero , to the right . in english . ah ? aha . in english ? okay , okay in english it says it before . and in english is NN , you know what NN is . aha . yeah . well i wait , i think , the number of of the , okay , so that has to be the number plus the NN okay because the first time what i did was put the star , and they said no , is you wrong name , something like that , ah my god . and now that put ah , it must be the other one and aha and it left . aha , chinese . that was what he said but he does not sound like if he was chinese . it could be because you don´t understand him . with the one you were talking , or , or with the one who is in the machine ? with the one i , with the one i was talking , he said that , that he oh , aha . are you serious ? hmm , because as , well , you do not understand anything . yeah , it is true . you don´t understand what he is saying , oh god . yeah so why does n't he say it in english . because and well , i understand english better than spanish . so aha . aha , yes . press one , or two or whatever . well what it is in spanish , press NN NN NN three , or whatever . ah , aha . like that it gives the , the aha . like that it gives , one the choice of , of how one wants to hear it . well yes . the , the NN she said in spanish . well , oh , she said it like , i do n't know how she said it the the little star . uh as NN aha , aha aha , i know . yeah but they also say NN in english , but in spanish . i did n't understand anything . wait , i 'm going to ask my dad , let 's see . how do you say this ? ah , yes . and the next time that , maybe we talk and i 'll tell you . ah hello , i 'm josefina here in philadelphia , how are you ? i talk we 've already talked , right ? i think that yes , aha , aha , hmm , no well good , and how are you ? yes , right ? at the beginning i thought so . how are you ? nice to meet you . how are well fine here , the weather is already a little cold ah yes , here it 's a bit cold it 's gotten cold now ? aha , aha , yeah it 's like fifty something the temperature here oh my , yes , because here it 's seventy something no , no , here we 're at NN at night , it 's fifty ah , so there is where , it 's , is it cold there like in chicago ? yeah ah so , that 's where it 's crazy strong the thing much snow when the snow comes , have you lived there for many years ? i 've been here for seventeen years and you arrived , you 've been there for seventeen years ? ah ? here , yes , hmm an , we 're almost the same , i 've been here in philadelphia for fifteen , before i lived in california , i do n't know if i told you but we were yes aha ah , so good , and , how has it gone with the program , do they call you every day ? yes , every day , almost every day , sometimes i have n't been there so the machine VBZ up but ah they get it because i have n't , i have n't gone out but , they 're VBG now , what is it ? about buying on the internet and the service of aha , by , yes , by telephone , buying by telephone , no ? aha , yeah that if you 've lost things , for me a little bit but if i 've bought something , above all hmm no , i do n't buy anything by telephone the only thing i 've VBN on internet is travel ah yes , i 've never bought travel , i 've bought other things on NNP yea ah no , i do n't like NNP NNP , well , they 're really JJ , but i gave in , and no , they sometimes get a lot of people with this stupid NNP thing yes , no ? they changed me interest because no , no my payment was delayed , and i told them that , that i was going to pay money order because i do n't like these credit cards and hmm yes well , they remember the information on the , it 's another of the things that i do n't like about buying on the internet hmm there you have to give your credit information that doesn't but it there , no , and did you buy like , it 's not very JJ for me , only people , i buy tickets for NNP and companies , american NNPS , companies that i know more , you know ? would be but and , aha , ah like that , things that offer like on NN and , no no , here a man bought a car and , and they VBD him , they took five thousand dollars from him not me , you know ? how can it be ? yes , they told him to send the five thousand dollars , they sent him and they did n't send him anything ? and the no , nothing , no the guy did n't even exist then well he stayed without money and , oh , and then , what , they did n't return it to him ? no , no because he sent a JJ check , the guy changes on NN of another person who does n't exist with , with fake papers goodness and the charge appeared but the person is not known exactly no the people where he said that he had , the car NN never existed like , and one that thinks that with a check well , you can VB , a friend of mine it happened aha similar but with tickets from , but not like that of her searching but rather that they offered her a NN , right ? aha for , for her and the husband , but a company like that with name and address and phone and all , then she like put it through her credit card , to VB oh my god more like five hundred , a thousand , i do n't know , a part of , of the tickets , later when they went to call the travel agency and that they told her that did n't exist and look nor alive nor dead they returned it , what happens is that the credit cards it seems that they do give a part to the person right ? if , if you , if you VBP it VBG a certain time , that they have a time limit for you to make the NN mm they give you back a part of it , yes , aha oh yes , your card shows that something that you paid before , or something like that was VBN , but , she paid two things and then the other thing she paid it in a different way , so no well , they pick his information to use it as they want , that 's JJ i 'm telling you that this service of i do n't like it , i do n't like NNS either , but i 'd like to have one to look for a job , to post my NNP online i think that 's a good service yes , well , i use it for that too and the internet , and the and one time , i was VBN by the NNS NNS , i think that 's their name . aha they send you an JJ email in which you have to provide your information for NNP as i use JJ to connect to the internet . mm so , it said that NNP needed to VB my information , so the JJ i am , started putting it and , what did i do ? i included my bank account so , then it said that i had to put my NNP , please put your NNP number and then i realized , and i thought , i do n't like that , nobody wants to know it , why do they have to know my NNP number ? exactly , aha so , i stopped there and i called NNP through the phone and they told me , no NN , no that 's personal NN , aha it 's not us , please change your NN , you know , the NN to VB in and all of that aha , the NNP , aha so , i had to change all of it , change the bank account , yes , they caught a lot of people a lot of people fell into that NN , it said that your bank needed to VB your NN or i do n't know what else aha and it was to steal your identity and everything from people JJ , i , i got scared this is why i do n't like it , on the telephone , well , what have i bought on the telephone , have i asked for anything NN he VBZ ? i do n't think i 've VBN NN , NN is the only thing i order on the telephone , NN and no and chinese rice i don't on the telephone i have n't bought anything , anything it makes me laugh , yes , i buy JJ and NNS , the only thing i bought on the telephone , right ? it was a special that , only the computer that came out from NNP NNP that i , i loved this brand and since i had clothes that , that they already sold me a JJ hmm , and i fell for it and this has happened to you , eh ? by watching the hispanic channel , and there were some things and you had to go and ask on your computer , on sale , the special , six hundred dollars , everything , well aha , these old computers that they VBP yes aha , yes , they change the memory and all that yes but it only lasted two months , we bought one for , well , i do n't , my boyfriend bought it , but , he bought it from NNP and it 's really good the one we 're using now ah , well yes , is a good brand yes but you know that , that you paid it like that little by little and he VBD it through , through the , he saw the ad on tv and then i he filled it out on the , aha , he filled it out on the internet and he bought it and it has come out good and they gave him JJ NNS aha , yes exactly , he paid i think that thirty seven dollars it was something like that ah how good , ah no , well is , aha , some silly thing , but he finished paying it ah well great , but for me it came out , i bought the ah it came out damaged ? no that of the , of the hispanics , it came out for getting into , for seeing those and i paid them six hundred and they did n't return anything ? no the company VBD afterwards , all the telephone numbers others came out , there ah my god yes that all of those are NNS , this people do n't know , do n't know what else to NN of garbage to with advertisement mm get money from the people in NNP they got from me , and the , okay now the one i bought from NNP NNP no , that one was , a brand name and JJ yes , those are good , aha , aha that one arrived perfect , and and how did i buy the NNP one ah well , you remember there were some offers that you called NNP ? and they approved me i gave my son a NNP one but that one , was paid and nothing happened no but these are companies that you can trust , like , i see things that , these NNS ah , aha as pretty NNS and these , these things that they offer like a trip hmm , look one of my friends was told that she had won a trip , there , where did she go ? how will it happen ? and until a girl from here was , i was laughing because after my friend gave it to me i saw the girl from i think it was on , on channel three who was saying that she and her husband were sent one of these papers that said that they 'd won a vacation to mexico and , no in the mail ? and so , eh , no , via fax ah good , ah via fax , so they sent you that you 've won a trip of whatever , you call this number and they tell you now and she said that they VBD it as wonderful , and so when she got to the place where the hotel was , it was a terrible place , the pool did n't have water , it was full of NN , ah nice , and , but they were able to go to mexico and everything ? yes , they were able to go , but i tell you , they bought it , but they said that , they did n't have anything for free , so they ended up spending almost three thousand dollars they gave them , um , sure , no vacation for the NN , ah , they robbed them , ah , they had to pay the taxes , they charged them a lot of taxes for the hotel so they had to pay , it did n't include NNS or a horrible room aha , not he room , she , well , she told everything because since she 's a NN well she made a full report there's then , is , she VBD as if they were in the NN ? when she arrived there , she went on a NN that they offered she says the NN , she arrived and i was afraid for her to take it because i thought that the NN was going to fall apart from how JJ it was a little NN there VBN , aha , aha NN VBD , ah how horrible well , she says that horrible , the food she says that , she says look i even did n't VB to eat because i thought i was going to be VBN and they ended up paying quite a lot more money , spending a lot of money , because then already , well they did n't VB , they got out of it and well they got on a plane and got mm they passed by a to another place , but the girl , i was laughing when i saw the girl , that she 's a NN , you know , they made a NN of her , but she , she VBD everything , she VBD the , the room if you saw the doors the ah the doors below all coming apart and with , like with that NN , horrible , horrible of NN mm one gets sick from that , better to leave from there because possible that yes that 's why that of , of buying things that they send me by fax and that they send me offers of those i VBP them , now they send me of NNP NNP , NNP NNP . ah okay , and , and not of , you know when ? what i , what i do is i go to where it says is super cheap when they say i start to read it there , and then if you read the fine NN it tells you , this offer is not , is not , VBD to a NNP NNP lines , and as soon as i see that is not VBN i forget it that i remove them ah , it says that is not ? if , if you read the really fine NNS , is that they are smart , they is like , i do n't know if you 've seen on the computer mm mm you get this types of messages hello , good evening hello good evening , with whom do i have the pleasure of talking ? ah , i 'm norma from here atlanta , georgia , and you ? ah , i 'm , my name is silvia , i 'm in philadelphia . ah , okay , i think we spoke before ? i think so , yes ah okay i think so , what country are you from norma ? ah , i 'm peruvian . ah , no perhaps we 've talked before , i do n't think i 've spoken with anyone from peru . ah , okay , and where are you from ? i 'm from cuba . ah , okay yes , it has been very interesting that i 've talked with people from so many countries . i 've talked with , with cubans , puerto ricans and well , i think cubans and puerto ricans only i think ah , no me too , just yesterday i was talking with , with a NNP . ah , yes and with a NNP also , i spoke with a guy . ah , no mine was , was with a girl . aha eh , and , and , and and from what country ? ah , yes from peru you told me . mm and how nice , peru must be interesting . aha i 've never had the chance to go . no yes , yes , no , like all countries all places have something interesting yes , yes , yes , yes , have something interesting , right ? such a rich NN that peru has . sure , eh , the culture is very yes , and how many years have you been here norma ? ah ten years ah eh , how 's atlanta , do you like it ? yes , more or less , right ? although i 'm a little bored but well ah because i 'm used to traveling everywhere , since i belong to a religious community ah then they were always sending me to different places . but now , well , i 'm here because i got married and have my kids . so , and my husband works here , so ah , and how many kids do you have ? i have two one is seven and the other is three ah , little . aha aha ah , NN e y and you , what , do you have kids ? eh , i have three but already adults . they are already , they are already big yes . one already works and the other two are in the university . mm so , so i do n't have kids in the house anymore ah , well more peaceful , yes , yes , is already more peaceful , and how is atlanta ? i was in atlanta one or two time but it was years and years and years ago ah , really ? and since then i know it has grown a lot and changed a lot . how is it , what do you think about it ? ah , yes , well atlanta is a big city , right ? yes compared to the cities in peru ah no is very big here in , no , is the biggest city of , of the NN so of course , mm mm so is , yes , really there are people , a lot of hispanics , right ? there are people from everywhere mm , yes , yes RB yes aha yes , well , they wanted us to talk of of marketing , spam , spam of yes , yes , yes , yes all those NNS of marketing so annoying . yes , well , well it bothers one ask for something and they call and they call and all the time and they want to sell you something . yes look i , you should ask in your telephone company if they have something aha that mine offers , that i have since a few years ago and here mm no , those sales calls do n't come in . ah , they do n't come in ? they do n't come in , do n't come in . is mm is a very good thing and that the people , the majority of the people do n't even know it exists . mm mm eh , no , i do n't remember what is called mm eh , what , what they call the service but is a service which VBZ when calls come in when there 's no person 's name there , eh , it only gives the number but a name associated with the number is not given . aha and the the calls from these of NN VBP the normal thing is that , that the number be given but without an associated name . aha and then when the system VBZ that it blocks so , well , s eh , it does n't exactly block what so it comes out to the phone a recording answers telling you to identify yourself . ah , ok but , the thing is not that i reach the phone and , and , they tell me that it 's from a certain place and that i have to bother to say mhm that no , it 's something much better than that . because ah , that 's good , look because the thing is that , that all these eh , eh , marketing systems are done by machine and that there is a machine yes , yes , yes they do it by computer , aha yes , yes , that , that the NN is VBN to VB a number and number , and number , and number , and number aha and then the person VBZ up when there 's already someone on the phone . mhm so when my recording answers to identify mhm the call gets lost because it 's just a computer . mhm ah , that 's a , it 's a very good NN , really . is good , is good , yes . that yes , yes , that yes what a shame , that the majority of the people do n't know it exists because it 's given me a lot of peace during all these years . yes i think that here the company that i think it is is RB south here in the south aha also has , but is that i say that it has to apply to something , or pay something more . something like that ah i think that it 's three of four dollars , yes , for that type of service . yes , yes , yes , yes it 's really worth . mm and well , they do n't call me much to sell me , some yes twice , even ah , how nice three times a week , something like that , yes , but well , and since always the connection , right ? like you say is a computer that calls then i hold the phone and answer , i have the phone and nobody , nobody answers me . but i do n't know then i hang up because i know that it 's a call of right ? because if it 's a person right there they answer you say hello and right there they answer . mm that 's how it is . look , and do you receive a lot of spam ? well , and the computer ? yes yes there 's always a lot of advertisement , right ? there are a lot of things . but one , i how you say VB them ah , JJ yes JJ yes , yes , yes i VBP them , mm yes no i VBP them and , and and the problem ended yes , like that , yes no , but , but always , sometimes is annoying and sometimes they send to many many things VBP how they call it com that they try to VB you in some businesses and things like that . those are dangerous right ? even by phone , they also do that type of ah , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , aha that type of right ? of work . one has to be careful with those things of NNS , mm yes , and , and mm , and when one NNS into any international thing mm one , one of the big NNS are all the , the NNS from NNP . mm , ah , really ? yes , oh , that , i read somewhere that the , those NNS was the second industry of NNP after the oil . ah , really ? i ca n't believe it , how awful ah , yes , yes no , that 's JJ . yes , not too long ago i received some , eh , some letters that a lawyer from , from africa i do n't know , NNP or i do n't know , another country yes but it was in africa had been , had been the , the lawyer of this very rich family that had a lot of NNS and that well aha , aha was looking for the relatives and that has come to the NN that i , my family is one of the , right ? the ones related with that rich family that there 's nobody from the NN that he has to VB then he has to i have to contact him and give him my information , something like that , ah okay but that , that you can say , one immediately knows that is a yes yes , yes , that , that 's typical of those NNS from NNP . a lie , right ? because one does n't have , i say from where , i do n't have any connection with any african no , no , no , no , mm , mm i do n't have african family if they said south america , well maybe i start to think . yes , ah , yes but , in africa is like that , yes no , in africa no , that already , is already completely , no , is a lie . yes that they try to VB you . yes , yes , and it 's incredible that there really are people that let themselves mm be VBN by those things . aha yes that is , is very dangerous right ? there are people that are in desperate situation or i do n't know what yes aha they want to see , try their luck . and see and , how did you know about this study ? because , i knew because it 's crazy here , but how , it called my attention that i 've talked with people in chicago , in connecticut , in florida ah , i knew because i VBD in a survey company , the survey NN . ah , i VBD in the company , hmm , i payed them thirty dollars so that they could send me their whole list of NNS , of their companies aha who do NNS to do the NNS , no ? and yes , yes , just in these days i was seeing survey NN , is it worth it ? and NN . yes , more or less . no ? because no , like i do n't know , my personal case is that i really did n't get what i wanted to get , no ? many times , ah , i find no ? a survey , or a study that pays me thirty dollars but every now and then , not every day . and many times you do n't qualify because , eh they ask for different people , no ? of a certain age aha , aha or the , people for example who are professionals . i , i 'm a home NN and i 'm a NN , no ? or people who have , i do n't know , VB kids , and i have small kids . a question of , they 're different aha , aha , aha no ? conditions that you have to fill . and if you VBP , no , yes , if you have all the NNS and qualify and do the study and they pay you thirty dollars , and well if they VBP you and don't and how many do you think that you do a year ? well , no , well , not many really . well , recently these people are really lucky because to me , not really , i do n't get many . sometimes i VBP , no ? i VBP for points , my points and i can pass them for money in another company , for example there 's one that well i VBP my points and i can change them for money . for one thousand five hundred points they give me fifty dollars . ah well , but that 's also the same case right ? they send you NNS but you have to qualify for those NNS . yes , for , with the requirements , if not , no . mm yes , here , here in philadelphia there 's a , a , eh one of those groups that does , eh , group NN aha and , and i signed up with them because a friend VBD it . aha and , and they would call me and they would call me and they would call me and they asked me a bunch of questions and there was always something that would VB you . that would make , exactly , yes . yes is what happens to me too i 've only done a study up to now that , yes that they paid me one hundred fifty dollars ah right ? but only this was last year ah no , and that , only that one hundred fifty dollars a year is not i do n't know yes is not much , is nothing . no yes because i 've just been seeing these things of , of , of mm that sell the information of the NNS that say that you can make thousands a month ah , yes , but that 's for , only so that you register in that i think ah , because i also registered right ? there and paid them thirty dollars . well , also thirty dollars is not a lot right ? and they sent me the list of yes , thirty is not a lot . hi , hi hello good , who am i talking to ? ah , you 're talking to vicente vicente yes from new york , and where are you from ? ah i 'm in georgia , paulina in georgia yes , where are you from vicente ? ah where are you from ? i , i 'm from panama from panama yes , i spoke with a previous person , from georgia , i do n't remember i from chile , ah yes yes , yes , look from , the matter that we have to talk about , i did n't understand very well because the machine was speaking with yes , it spoke i think about , about marketing of of spam and telemarketing of , yes what happens with if you buy things through the internet and email that come to you even no , no well it 's , that 's what here , it 's saying that if you buy , not only is speaking about telemarketing and spam but also if they bought something like yes ah , yes we bought something like that or by phone when they call and offer you things and they offer things like ah yes if they sell i generally do n't , i do n't even give them a chance of you do n't buy things like that not unless i 'm the one looking for the thing , but i like it when they offer me , yes , yes when they call you and they offer you ah i buy a lot through the internet but when i 'm looking ah , exactly that is the with me if they call me to tell me something no , but if i see something on television , in a NN , in another place and things that that i need right or things that i think that i want to know about that thing or that can is of the , is of health , something like that for health maybe i buy it , do you understand ? eh yes or something that i already know , do you understand ? yes if you call me and you are offering me something maybe something for health that i already know that it 's a NN a NN or whatever right if i already know of that , of that , that what you 're talking or that you 're offering me maybe i will buy it if the price is good yes but is for very RB that i do it , do you understand me ? yes i generally no , i do n't buy a lot of things if they call me , only because there are so many of these who call and get your information and after no , they 're JJ yes and also want information , because many of those who talk to you are offering something on the internet or over the phone , many times they want your credit card number yes credit and you , you have to stay there , because you want , do you understand what i 'm saying ? sure you have to be careful with this yes well and sometimes they act like they 're from a big company , a major company yeah and they VBP sure so you have to be very you need to do an NN on the other side yes i VBP this is what i do , and whenever i go to buy something on the internet , or something like that i go to see those sites where the they put a NN , how do you say NN ? that the aha well they say no , they have the opinions of people who have used this company and say , this was n't a good company , or they do n't VB , they do n't send the things , or they send it late or whatever and very late i do that , i see that first and see how the company sounds and later i use it ah that 's what we do when we buy things on the internet what things what type of things have you bought well , i have n't bought , i bought once with a , a NN some NNS ? yes you like the health thing a lot ah , sometimes i think , sometimes i think in health things because nowadays , not only do you have to be buying health things but that not only of the food , understand ? aha you have to , get in something , a NN with the food not just the food , so i think sometimes in getting something else because sometimes i do n't eat like i should eat , you understand me ? i 'm sometimes eating fast in the street and i 'm eating this and the other okay and not only that because ah when one is from latin america he of latin last name thinks that they eat well but they do n't eat well because i think the truth is like that because the , the food from latin american is very JJ , with a lot of fat and all that of course it depends who VBZ , yes yes and it depends what you are eating right , but the thing is that one thinks that but in general , yes , we use a lot of oil a lot of oil and they think that , i talk with the , here in new york we have a lot of dominicans and puerto ricans , there 's the food , they think and think that they are eating better that the united states the propaganda of latin america is very strong , you understand me ? yes , i find that in that case the difference is that there is in , in latin american generally one VBZ a lot , well in new york i imagine you take the JJ yes the subway aha . i do n't know , in latin american you take the bus , all those buses everywhere and almost , not many people , well there are people with cars obviously but is more common walking and taking the aha the buses and things well but like it helps VB that , that fat like you lose weight walking , but when one is here and keeps eating the same and plus on top of that you go in car well , the thing is that where you live in georgia perhaps they use cars a lot and california the same , in california you go everywhere in car yes because the people you do n't know , the people from new york walk more than many people that , that yes is that you are in the city itself in the city itself , exactly so you walk yes that city is very crazy is still very hard having a car yes the car you move the car it cost you two three hundred dollars a month to park the car sure you understand me ? and it 's really full of cars yes no , we use public transportation , you know ? and it 's good because they have , the bus passes here every hour so , what you do , if you miss it then you have to wait an hour stuck there yes , we walk a lot in the city , i was reading a report on this and in what part of new york are you in ? i 'm in the city itself , manhattan in manhattan new york , new york man , the city of man , new york VBZ of five NNS and they 're called NNS , ok , there are five five , what ? five , they say , i do n't know how you say it in spanish , five blocks , no not blocks but five , ah neighborhoods , neighborhoods no , it 's bigger than a neighborhood , much bigger than a neighborhood , the city of new york VBZ of five NNS , no , i 'm always looking for the word for NNS but i can never find it there are five NNS in new york city ah yes , manhattan , queens , exactly , manhattan , queens what else ? ah , NNP island , manhattan , queens , and the bronx the bronx , i know there are many brooklyn , queens , manhattan do you know , brooklyn , queens and manhattan and the island , that is more JJ island that is state , island like i don´t know i know it , no maybe we did went there a a a that part too the bronx the bronx there is much yes the bronx i think that i did not go to visit we yeah , yeah because the bronx there are many puerto ricans yeah in manhattan in the JJ part of manhattan in the north of manhattan there are many dominicans yeah see and even when i am here , the , the puerto ricans speak spanish very bad very fast i imagine oh my god no , not only fast , the thing is that we VBP you know have some words VBP that belong to a country , a region , in your country there are some regions where people talk different do you understand me ? aha but there is a base there where you can understand the puerto ricans , they a a problem with the r they have a problem with the r the puerto ricans VBP it different '' NN '' instead of `` NN '' like a , more like an NNP you know , when i say `` JJ '' hmm but the , the hair is what they have in the hair yes they VBP it different and the dog is what VBZ , is an animal they , they , have problems with the r itself , all the words that have r they have problems with that the ones from other countries that i 've know and was hard to understand at first was el salvador aha it was also hard okay understanding the NNPS but , i can understand many other countries , i can understand them very well , but the truth that i see the puerto ricans that there are so many words , how are you going to have problems with the r the r , then there are many words that you ca n't VB , you understand me ? yes i 'm going to tell you that and you where are you from ? from panama , right ? ah yes is panama , yes yes panama , a small country , understand ? yes three million but is very developed , because the panama NN is very big but , the panama NNP in all parts of the world , you understand me ? and there , is very commercial there yes i can imagine , i have , i have a friend who is from panama yes , yes , it 's developed for a small country , you know what i mean ? and there , there , they 've always had , panama 's currency has always been the united states ' currency dollars , that 's panama 's currency they have so much NN ah they have so much NN yes , yes , yes , we use the dollar , the american dollar , right ? it 's just that when you have money in your country , it 's money from the united states um , yeah and there 's a lot , there was a time when we had more than a hundred banks , for a small country that has nothing because , the NN , do you know what i mean , from all over the world and what 's panama like ? it has three million people yes , but , how many millions does the biggest city have ? the biggest city is panama , panama city i see that 's NNP , that 's the capital as well and how many people does it have no , i do n't how many exactly , i ca n't tell you how many people , because it 's changed so much , i left panama more than CD years ago the situation has changed a lot there , there are more people living away from the capital i see you know what i mean , panama city VBD , it 's like mexico , mexico city yeah understand ? yes well well consider it but mexico , the city of mexico has millions exactly , it was , it was , no at one time it was the most JJ city in the world bigger what mexico mexico city , yes yes yes , it was the most JJ in the world , because you have the capital you have the country of mexico right ? yes yes is huge in mexico city you know what i mean yes understand me ? while in other countries , the united states , there 's no capital like that in the united states there 's no capital of the united states , the capital of the united states is washington , dc understand ? yes , but it 's a political capital , more than anything yes , RB , only for , mexico , the capital of mexico is not for the number of NNS yes , of NNS at one time it had more people than new york many , many people did n't know that and still still like that the city of , of mexico , capital of mexico had more people that all , all the world but ah that was before , i 've always liked a man named VBZ he was one of mexico NN and things like that he , he wrote many books and things aha he had a NN , a good NN , how do you say it , he could say things that many latins did n't like to hear yes so good political NN or something he wrote about political and situations in general i see in general , you know what i mean ? he writes about many things in general and when he writes he makes you think a lot what 's his NN ? NNPS , i ca n't remember the NN , i do n't know , no , VBZ i see , the JJ political , how is it ? political active , RB , he writes about a lot of things i see , NN and everything , you would like to talk to him i see well , good night . carmen good night okay what do you want ? i am jenny i talked to you yesterday , or the day before yesterday . yes it is in nebraska okay how are you ? yes , i´m fine okay NN NN is about telemarketing and spam okay , okay , you start however you want yes , i do n't like when people calls by phone trying to sell things okay because they always speak in a time that should not call okay , specially when people are eating and things like that yes okay okay , they don´t take a no as an answer okay they are always working trying to sell things okay , okay . and sometimes it 's not even the truth aha , aha mhm and you know , it bothers me that when you look at your email aha it 's full of trash , of spam i do n't even read them i just take a look and the email has this NN aha it 's called NN and you can just VB it , i do n't even look at it aha , well , i 'm going to tell you something , look aha , aha i get lots of telephone calls because there are some companies that have five cents per minute , right ? long distance since i use the phone to call long distance aha , aha well , i call my mom to puerto rico everyday . aha so , they call me and say they charge five cents per minute and i do n't listen to them aha and then they keep on calling me they want to speak with the person who VBZ the phone , it 's me but i always tell them that yes the person is not here , he 's not here , so they ask me at what time is he getting home and i say , at nine NNP , so that they stop bothering me aha , oh aha and yeah after nine at night they do n't call me but the other day they started all day long they called me and the machine answers when i see the NN NNP aha , oh that it 's long distance , NNP i tell them no , and i wo n't pick up the phone aha but every now and then they come and call me , well sometimes i get up to fifteen , sixteen calls a day aye god but i do n't answer because ah , i 'm already tired of them and aha ah and always when i go to work and when i come home the machine is full of messages , the NN NNP is full of numbers aha and what i do is i hear the messages aha and the ones that are n't important i VBP aha but those that interest me , yes , i take down the number and i call who i have to call aha but ah also the telephone company like two years ago , the telephone company , i was in puerto rico aha and my daughter stayed there , with my son living in my apartment aha and the telephone company called my house here aha but i told my kids do n't get the phone when it 's the telephone company do n't get it at all ah because they start to sell that if they have phone with camera , that if they have phone with answering machine with NN NN aha that if they have JJ phone cheap and all , i tell my kids do n't get the phone for nothing aha that it 's from the telephone company since they call here i do n't know how they changed my telephone number without me giving them NN really ? that supposedly when you are you are responsible for your own phone aha you are the one that gives the NN for them to change the number aha , ah and they changed it without me giving well i did n't , i was in puerto rico aha . and my kids never answered the phone aha then ah ah i do n't know how they do telemarketing i receive every four five days but i never answer either mhm you know that with the NNP you just aha you have to tell them to VB your name from the computer and they do n't VB you up again so that they do n't bother you VBP aha you ask them to VB your name from the computer aha , aha and like that they do n't VB you again oh so in the mail i receive many NNS mhm oh me too from yes credit cards if i want to apply for a credit card aha NNS for magazines the what i do is that i VBP up everything aha i throw it in the the ah in the garbage because i do n't VB leaving a paper ah i mean i VBD it aha and i throw it in the garbage can because i 'm afraid of VBG it only once and VBG it in the garbage can aha and that someone ah since that has so much personal information it someone gets it and NNS my identity yes then the spam does n't worry me because i do n't use the computer , i hardly ever use the computer oh aha but my daughter yes , my daughter uses the computer a lot and she says , and she says that when ah it has a lot ah they send a lot of spam aha and well she VBZ like fifty spam email oh aha and she what she does is that she VBZ all the ones that do n't interest her aha sometimes ah the the , they sell her a lot of things through the email and she all that interest her she buys but hardly ever aha because what they sell is garbage yes then ah they also send me in the mail many letters of insurance yes me too of life that since i already turned fifty that i already have to get a life insurance so that my loved ones do n't stay ah JJ when i die , many things yes i also get lots of letters from banks to become a NN right and . . . but i do n't listen to them , what i do is i read them , i VBP them and i throw them into the trash can uh huh because if you listen to all of those letters , you 'll end up NNS and you 'll start sending yes finding everything they VBP yes , that 's how it is ¿right ? , i even put my name on that list so , right that i do n't get telemarketing calls right and they 're still calling me ok , because a girl , i VBD to a girl yesterday about this very thing right she lives in philadelphia and she told me that [ if ] i call a number and i call a place right and tell them not to send me any more letters , that i 'm not interested about insurance or credit cards or anything right and all , and they get me off the list oh aha to do not send me because sometimes the NN , i have a NN aha and i have to go everyday the the seven , the six days of the week i have to go for my letters aha , aha because it gets so full so and so much that if someone send me a package they can not put it inside the NN i have to pick it up inside the mail office yes , yes and that is a waste of time too too here at home i have a big NN aha , and they put inside it garbage , a lot a lot a lot of garbage of of papers and today i receive one from from NN insurance i don´t know where that is oh i also received that today aha and i said why do that people send me this if aha what for am i going to take a life insurance if you pay more for life insurance than they are going to give , what what they are going to give you yes then ah i told my daughter not now every time as the owner of the house put a big garbage NN aha every time i receive letters that i am not interested in i break them and throw in the garbage do you know what my JJ husband does aha , aha when they send things , he always puts an NN inside the card aha he puts all their papers aha and back the NN , they send it back they break it and you send it back to them yes and they send it back again ah ah ah they send the paper back again or what ? i do n't know if the company sends back another , but he always breaks the cards aha and you put it in their NN and they send it back in the mail NN interesting always ah so it does n't continue because it 's a lot yes and they bother you on the telephone too , they bother you , they send cards ah , in the mail aha because the NN VBZ up a lot a lot a lot yes always what gets me a lot is someone calling to ah , sell children 's books oh like like the it 's that one that comes yes and VB and all yes yes aha yes before the used to call me not any more thanks god yes because now my children are grown NNS yeah they always tell me that aha , aha , aha and now they do n't call me from from the phone companies yes at and t and NNP called me a lot aha but now now i told them that well that that aha i VBD my name and i told them that i have VBG and i am happy with them aha , aha , aha with them and now now they do n't bother me with that well the other time about two weeks ago someone called me and as i was working the left the phone number in the NN NNP aha i come and say i don´t know this telephone , i don´t know the number , i called back and it was a telephone company oh my god and tells me thank you for calling but see right now i came from work i am sorry but i can not talk to you because i am tired and want to eat call me later , later was ten at night i know they are not going to call me nothing more aha but when ah they call me i will recognize the number i will not aha answer but when they call me and i do not recognize the number in the box aha , aha i call them back but when there are those the companies selling you a thing selling you another one that if changing you to another long distance company aha i tell them i am sorry i can not talk to you now i don´t have the time call me in one or two hours aha and if one hour or two if they call me i have the number in the box i know is the same person who is calling me but it bothers very much much much much aha yes short time ago they called me telling that ah a company was going to give me back some money i spent on things like people that sell things on the phone aha and needed the number of my bank account to deposit money oh and i told him that i don´t have a bank account and told me that aha if i had an account there in the same town where i live aha i told him i do n't i told him sorry but i do n't have an account aha if you really are going to return the money hello , hi . who do i have the pleasure to talk with ? hi , good afternoon . i 'm josefina , from philadelphia , and you ? eh , i am , my name is silvia , i 'm from philadelphia too . ah , how are you ? nice to meet you . nice to meet you . what 's , what 's your name again ? NNP . ah , josefina . i do n't know if we have talked before oh , right , yes because i remember because is my aunt 's name . ah , yes , JJ yes , yes , yes , coincidence , yes what country is the family from ? eh , we are cubans . ah , correct , i think we have talked yes , and you are from ? the family and everybody from venezuela ah aha no , maybe , maybe we have n't talked , i think that that i have n't talked with anybody from venezuela . ah , well then we have n't , is that we have talked with so many people yes , that 's , right you kind of loose the NN yes , i , a few days ago , i have yes done around fourteen or fifteen calls , no ? yes , i , i believe i have too oh , and how has it been to you , you get to meet lots of interesting people . yes , it 's nice , right ? you get to meet lots of people . i like it too , yes yes , yes , i was speaking yesterday to a lady from peru and the day before yesterday i spoke to a woman from spain . oh , that 's nice . yes , it is , yes and they live in different cities all of them , yes , aha , aha . ah , i see . yes , one of them lives in atlanta . aha . and i 've spoken to people in chicago and a woman from texas and people from connecticut , oh aha , and new york too , no ? new york yes , with , yes , yes , yes . mhm . yes . yes is interesting and mm that topic i do n't understand too much , i think that it 's of marketing and that , right ? yes , of , of what one thinks of , of those NNS of yesterday i laughed a lot with a lady , because we were talking of , ah , when we buy things through the internet or through the mail aha . or through the phone , because ones sees the advertisement sometimes on the tv aha , aha and places the , and places the order by uh , phone but yes ah , they have VBN me ah , really ? with a computer that i bought the first time aha , what happened ? and that thing arrived eh for watching spanish channel , NNP aha . and the offer came out and some men right ? and then when i VBD it and it arrived mm . and it was like that some NNS that you could see that were used , right ? ah . and of different NNS , for example the NN of the computer was one brand , the screen was another and like that ah . then , that after two months got damaged and i sent it , right ? mm . to get fixed , then they returned it , and that fixed and it got damaged again and i called and already the phones were of another ah . they were n't of the company ah . so i lost that money , i threw away the computer ah , and they that happen to be so expensive that were then the computers . yes , but this was a good offer , and that 's why i thought that it was a yes , yes , yes . a profit and what i did was lose the six hundred dollars that i paid . ah , what a sin . and , it could be that , that , that in the hispanic channels eh , is eh . they do n't check much yes , yes , yes , that 's why , yes perhaps the companies are less JJ . they sell right , the NN , i do n't buy those things , now even less yes . some NNS and some mm . and NNS and i say that maybe those things cause harm mm . and this , and the other lady spoke to me about other people who also lost for ah . ah , while traveling , no ? that they have sent them to sell trip tickets ah , and yes , they are great NNS . uh huh , and they have bought and paid and then they VBP that no ticket exists , no travel ticket , nothing . and , and mm , and where did they get them ? through hispanic channels ? no , i believe that it came by fax , she said . ah a fax where they tell you this , there is this travel deal , for example , and this was for mexico , right ? yes , yes . and we will pay everything , and then , it was not cheap , right ? uh huh . and then you get these JJ pictures . uh huh the hotel , and how was this , and the restaurants . mm . and when they arrived there it was crap ah . that everything was dirty or the NNS broken , the doors are , eh , everything NN , so that like you ca n't even touch things um dirty , the NNS , well , they had to , they had to rent somewhere else and they left somewhere else , ¿right ? oh it was , they lost what they had payed for um but the pictures were wonderful and yes , yes , yes and what they offered then , they said they spent twice as much because they had to yes to , of course they were n't staying in that JJ place no , no , of course not , oh and i say , oh my god , because they have sent me a lot of , from , they say meat cross NNP , ¿right ? yes , yes , but those are more serious and , yes , but she tells me , VB , VB way down , it says it 's not connected to the NN company oh , they use the name the use the name oh and they 're NNS , ¿right ? , so uh huh and you think they are that uh huh and he went to buy that and then sure , sure , yes these people that paid to mexico , uh , they payed by check uh huh and , well , the check was VBN by a person that does n't exist , VB name uh huh with fake NN 's , so they could never ask for a NN like it happened to me with the computer yes , yes , yes it 's terrible what a sin , for people so JJ to exist , that want to steal people 's money , ¿right ? i think so , i say i 'm so scared about so many things that you no longer know who to trust , ¿right ? yes , i really , for example , offers or things that show up in , uh , hispanic things , i would n't trust anything right , it 's seems JJ , it 's too bad , really , that that , yeah , right that you have to say that yes , exactly yes thing but it 's just that american things are more serious sure , with , sure , and the NN , ¿right ? , oh yes . he name of the thing that you 're buying , and like a site where you can , eh have a NN service to call , like where you can complain and everything sure , hmm , yes , yes , yes . but if those who are there are the same who sell and are the same who charge and are the JJ yes what are you going to do ? yes , yes , yes . aye god , and what do you think about cuba and venezuela ? with this chavez guy , aye , aye . it 's a NN , here we 're really sad . and , and i do n't know how they VBD this election of this NNP who was hmm . and said that the election was JJ because this , aye , i remember , i was VBG today that ah , they VBD the NN of the NNP hmm . they went out on hmm . on the internet , they send me an JJ but this is , that the voting there is very rare , for example , out of ten million people a million will go and vote , and that 's all there is , no ? aha . sorry , it 's that , they should say no , there 's no election or something because no no one came all the same , yes , yes , yes . and it 's what happened that those who go are so few ah , aha . that they say , well , i won because i ended up with so many votes but yes . it 's that people VBD and so this is what 's happening and why did they VB ? the first time because since they were all , desperate to get out of the NN that no one voted but i do n't know , i imagine that for , well obviously this man stayed ah . and everyone believed in him , no ? aha . so some people voted , thirty percent , i think , of the voting population this is really little , around here aha . because here in the united states , eh , few people vote but they vote about fifty percent , something like that i think ah , something like that , this has to be because yes . they have to count the votes that were n't powerful , right ? yes , yes , yes . then that was the first time , later everybody already said , no we 'll never do this again , let 's vote even if it 's against the other person , but sure . after they 've done it , then already this , this , has so much force that they cancel uh , well , they do the , the impossible so that you ca n't see the , the opposite but rather the yes , yes , yes , yes . what a sin . and that is the part that , yes , already the people wo n't be able to do more and i VBP that in the united states they are not VBN about that , nor do they give any NN to what 's happening in venezuela . well , how the JJ how it is , right ? like that . that one does n't even know because they do n't even VB it that one , one finds out through their family and through other people sure , yes . no , i feel very bad for venezuela because , with seeing that , that chavez eh is such a NN of NNP castro , one , one already understands what type of NN he wants to VB ah . and today that they said , my dad told me here in the television that venezuela was venezuela and brazil , the two worst countries that , that have not VBN anything in latin america . with cuba mm , mm but , and instead they came out that they do n't do anything for anybody . this is bad , right ? yes . and who knows if he will use it to make each , ah , FW against and to do damage , yes . he says that , what , from here they wanted to do a , a , how do you say ? an NN and kill him , well , there there are many people who want how good , right ? them to leave after they sent him to the other side yes , hmm . but , i do n't know and so who knows ? he says that this is very certain , but here it 's not VBN and there there 's a lot eh , of soldiers and near venezuela and on the island in front , no ? and there are NNS , and there 's this , there are NNS but who knows if it 's true or made up , because he 's such a JJ yes , yes , yes . that you do n't know what he says yes , yes . you ca n't believe it , but what a pity , hopefully this will have another , another life , no ? aye , yes , yes , yes . another way of getting out of this but they 're such NNS , i was watching an interview last night where an american man who had , he , had passed a year in cuba was saying , aye , everything in cuba 's good , only that oh eh , they are RB backwards mm . those are people that do n't even know what they are saying , i think . because they are not living in the , the NN of that , right ? they go and look and say ah , they are bessy oh , NNP , how are you ? what 's up ? look , i was thinking , oh , when will i talk to NNP ? oh , it 's just that every day at six o'clock i have been running , and i just forgot my number to VB in , and my computer is giving VB some problems , so the other day i just decided to remember the number aha and so , how are you ? fine , and you ? how was your weekend ? i know we are not supposed to talk about weekend , but , oh well no , i went on NN this weekend aha , oh around here , in NNP NNP oh , i see . and my NNS still hurt . VBG i can see from here , the , yeah from there ? yes , when i was up there , some people from canada really ? up there , i got to aha i said , let 's walk seven miles forward and seven miles back , but no way , i VBD four miles because it was so JJ and wide almost two feet wide mhm and after i went down there . and it was earth , and NNS , and water , and , and i was n't used to this . so , i said , no , man , NNP , ah . aye , how terrible . hey , so , no one from telemarketing has called you lately ? ah , i want to see . ah , no , no no one . and you ? really ? aha , because my son VBZ when they call me , i say , because it was , it was part of VBG the house , aha . and so , since they 're always calling me , i say no , the woman rents the house , she 's not here . he watches me and says , who are you talking too ? and i say , i 'm tired of and i say no , and yeah . aha . they have n't called me , today . but , but what makes me JJ , my husband , is crazy . ah , you also did this ? yes , but , be before . of , of selling . yes . yes , i could n't do this kind of job . i ca n't , i say to my husband , you ca n't make me sell anything , because i do n't like selling things to people , trying to sell people things . i ca n't . sell . and he works in sales ? no , and , my husband works in , eh , computers . ah , mm . so , that 's what he , he 's trying to help me find a job . but , and now no , are you washing dishes ? no , i 'm just washing my hands . ah , he just called me because i have a NN that is killing me . and , he tells me , are you going to cook today , or you want to cook today ? and i say no . ah , thank you , how nice . yes , and he ask me what do you want ? and i say , bring me anything , because i ca n't think about what to eat right now with this NN . no , no . you want to cook ? ah , no , well , that does n't bother you , if they tell you , you want to cook ? no , no , i do n't want to cook . but , what do you want to eat ? ah , whatever , it does n't matter . aha . okay , but later , ah ? yes , my husband is the cook . my husband is the cook . really ? he likes to cook , he 's an NN , i do n't cook for thanksgiving nor christmas , because i do n't know how to make the turkey . you , you do n't know to cook turkey ? no , my brother taught my husband how to cook turkey , it makes me laugh , so , he 's the one who VBZ the turkey . really ? and , he 's calm , he does n't say to me , aye , this year , he says , no , what size am i going to buy ? and the NNS that he does with this turkey , and in the end , he knows well . aha . i say , thank god that i have a man like that . aye , aha . the work . aha . two , that 's it . twelve , ah , twelve , and the rest were trash . telemarketing i say , aye , my god , and my husband says , man , you get all these things that come out there ? and i say , i say , i say , this is why , you will see . is that , when you get on the internet and they ask you for the email . yeah , is true . hard . i hate that . well , yes . ah ? what do you do ? VB like this one , but on the computer . or sometimes , my son does it . that , so , they pay me for the survey mm , me too . some , not all . ah , me too , i still have it in the NNP , no , no , i VBP and since i do n't , my NN i have n't VBN it . my husband is the one who , he takes it form there , like giving me a bill , and i laughed , because he said it was for services given , and i say , what services did you give me for me to pay you ? so , he started laughing because he , so , because i did n't put my credit card . so , he , he took it out , he gave me a bill , i say ok , pay him . ah , aha . have you ever bought something on the internet ? yes , i like to buy things , the majority , some of the NNS that i do , pay me with with NNP . oh , aha . NNPS . so , now i have like ninety eight dollars , i told my husband , okay , someone will get something free for christmas . i say , less money for me , to spend . so , the other month ? aha . oh , so it 's really JJ . no , no , no , no , this is the other surgery , that they told me , i have to put , i go to , o i 'm looking for work , and now i ca n't look for work because they told me that i have to stay in bed for two weeks , aha . i tell my husband , ¿what job is gon na give me a month off when i 'm just starting ? right , and , ¿what 's that , that surgery about ? oh , i got some NNS , near the NNS right , o well , and , ¿what 's it 's name ? so , uh huh , i had a , four , uh , four , i mean , six years ago ¿you see ? , uh huh and when i went to the doctor , he said i had six now oh then my husband says `` lets go , do that now '' JJ ? NN ? are they dangerous no dangerous , ¿right ? that , he says it they are n't , that 's what he , that 's what gives me trouble when that time of the month comes right plenty of blood comes out oh yes , that , and it bothers me a lot . so , this is why e i use too many NNS a month . so , they told me , the doctor tells me , use use them too much , he says . and the pain , i say well , i deal with it , because i do n't like to take medicine . he says , you 're crazy , woman . and it hurts you ? aha . it hurts me a lot so , he says that it 's this . so , oh . because this happened to me to but well , it 's called NN and yeah , it happened a lot , they 're like NNS , the doctor says , yes , and i do n't have NNS , yeah , they 'll pay us for this call , right ? they 're going to pay us both for this call . yes , i still have it . ah , sorry ? no , yeah , well , yes , telemarketing is really annoying . yeah , they 'll pay us for this , certainly . ah , yeah . huh ? i also like you . talking , like five times , with this . yes , we keep talking , yesterday i talked with a guy who does salsa and what did he tell you ? and i talked with him twice . and , ah , he 's called alex . so , you , yes , so if you take the call , like this one at nine and night , you 'll call alex . oh , no , that 's very late . no . what , what time is it there in seattle ? here it 's also six . he 's in california ? aha . no , i will never take a call at nine at night . from , until ten ? hmm . since i 'm always VBP until really late , so , i told them that they can call me until , oh , aha , my husband gets mad sometimes , when they 're calling and calling . and if you do n't take it right then , will they talk to you until VBN ? i say no , no , no . yeah , because not at NN . aha . give your , give me your e mail now , i will send you an e mail with mine . ah , ok , are you VB ? aha , what ? are you ready ? yes . it 's NNP NNP as in NN . it 's NNP , yes . be NNP NNP NNP NNP and , do you know what an NN is ? NNP aha , the of , so , tamara tamara aha , at NNP . right , oh , ok , so i 'll give you mine well , send me yours there oh , no , right now , go , get paper and NN oh no , so , ¿you , you ? before we run out of the ten minutes yes , ¿did you put yourself there ? , ¿where you the one who told me that you put yourself on , uh ? oh , ¿where ? or it was n't you ? , the list so they wo n't call you JJ list ? the , uh , these people that calls you to sell you stuff oh , no , i , i have n't signed to any , any list no , oh i did n't know there was a list i think only here in the united states . it 's just , it 's a list where you can get in , and they do n't , they do n't call you anymore right but , i do n't know where you start to find this JJ list no , maybe , uh , call , call the phone company , ¿what is it ? the telephone maybe right , maybe they know right , ok , yeah i have heard that yeah , you give your name , your name and your phone and they do n't send hello hello yes good evening uh , my name is annie , ¿what 's your name ? oh , my name is jose , ¿and you ? annie annie yes oh , nice to meet you ¿where are you calling from ? uh , from philadelphia oh , i believe i have spoken to you RB oh , yeah , ¿where do you live ? miami um , RB , yeah , i do n't know you 're from spain , ¿right ? no , no , i 'm from , well , half guatemalan and half cuban oh , well then it was n't you , i 'm sorry no , no , no , i do n't think so , yeah , ¿what do you think about telemarketing ? ah , i do n't like it . i think that no one likes it . with everyone i 've talked to , no one likes it . no , but , yes , it 's JJ , right . yes , i 've never understood the reason for this . why do people call ? but yes apparently , you know , they make money because if not , they would n't do it , you know , call so much . yes , yes . i do n't know , and luckily i have a cell phone and i do n't give my number to any companies and , this is why no one calls me , but i 'm lucky , eh , for example in the JJ houses , where , i imagine they get the numbers out of the phone books , yes always , they 're always calling and calling , i know that in the case of my mom , she had , yeah , almost every day someone called selling something . and one day she called the telephone company and they said that , there was a service and with this service , if the person called a number that was n't VBN , if it was n't VBN . so , a recording came out saying that they did n't , well accept numbers , calls from , from the number , where the person had n't VBN themselves , only if they , yes say your name . so the company VBZ the name and then they call you , and ask if you want to accept the call . yes but the problem is that , this VBZ a human to be on the other line , but the thing is , the majority of these calls , are done by computers , yes and so well this never happens calls , well , it 's very rare to get a call from telemarketing . hmm so it 's fantastic , it 's fantastic . but it 's really annoying . mhm and that person was not paying his bill , so a lot of times . yes but and , they kept on calling me and i ca n't do anything about it and that 's what bothers me most and they probably did n't believe you , right , they would think , they do n't want to pay and are just making up stories and aha mhm that 's horrible so , you know , i 've called the phone company but , since it 's usually a one eight hundred number mhm they ca n't block the calls . so , we never called him back , really , because it was n't for us , we did n't know that person , we thought that someone had RB had that same number . but , yes , yes but , no , it also happened to us one time as we are , we used to live in tennessee , so , oh , aha well , the truth is that i do n't know , fifteen years , a long time , so , oh , not that much really , ten years , someone called , it was a man from tennessee so , he left a message in the phone , it was like , mhm oh , oh , it was like , NNP i 'm in the hospital and they never knew who NNP was or who the man was , JJ , but sometimes we do get calls that are kind of crazy , but we have also received calls from an NN . i , i do n't know you , i 'm not going to call you , you know . yes , yes , yes but you know , to me , the telemarketers , i do n't know how they make their money , because i do n't know anyone , anyone who has bought something , you know , what they 're selling . yes and , and even less the spam that they send you . yes , but also , not so much with telemarketing but with spam . yes the person has the list already . they make their message , they send it to the computer , and send it and send it . it takes but it is incredible , it is RB cheap , sending all that , because before , hundred years ago for instance , there were not such messages , right ? but now everything is so cheap it is JJ , a waste of time , because before , imagine when you had to write letters by hand , the only messages sent were important things , right ? yes nowadays , anything . sending costs nothing , right ? yes no , i mean . but we have never bought anything of spam or telemarketing mm to the trash . yes to all the companies on the internet and there they get , yes thousands of spam messages every month , right . yes but , and , and what i do n't understand with NN is that for example i create an address that i did n't give anyone , anyone , an address that i created , and never used , but , there i returned a while later , and already , i had started receiving spam messages mm and i do n't know from where , is that , in some way , i do n't know with NN in some way . they find the address of people . aha because there are so many people in NN that , that can pick messages RB , like that , or emails RB almost . yes but i do n't know how , but they already had the number , the address of , of this address that never already i do n't know how they found it , i do n't know . yes and and now , aha , it continues and , and i say that now it has become harder . um for the NNS in the united states and now there is more VBG that , that is very hard finding them . oh is , almost like , i think that it is , finding a code , aha but then , on the NN of , of being like that like no , no , i really do n't know , but a bunch of NNS NNS of , of , of , no , no i do n't exactly understand right , but then , this process VBZ a certain amount of time , right ? aha and then the thing is that when the computer does this process , the message has a , like a NN that , that the computer made this process to send the message so , the thing is that if the person , let 's suppose it 's you who writes it , you write an email , then you send it . it is so short , this process , that you do n't even notice , and you send it , and that 's it , right ? mhm but , if you are sending thousands of emails , the process is done while sending the thousands and thousands hello ? hello ? hello , how are you ? fine , how are you ? fine , thanks , thanks . i 'm paulina , with whom am i speaking ? ah , vicente . i 'm vicente and from , from , where are you from , paulina ? from chile , and you ? from chile , i 'm from panama . from panama . yes , but in what , in what state are you living now ? in georgia in georgia . and you ? i , i 'm in new york did n't we talk yesterday ? ah ? did n't you talk with me yesterday ? that 's what i was thinking . we talked yesterday . yes , and it was the same topic eh , was it yesterday or the day before ? i talked with , with a spanish woman too , i do n't remember exactly . ah , i do n't know , i think that it was yesterday . and what an , eh , and ah , yes , you were talking about the of carlos NNP . of telemarketing that you do n't buy from many people when they call or something like that . yes , yesterday . yes , oh , boy and , we finished the conversation with carlos NNP that if you wanted to talk with someone , i do n't know what , that did n't speak with latins with someone VBD or i do n't know what oh , yes , yes , eh , yes that you asked me about , about NNP 's first name it was carlos , right ? carlos NNP ? ah ? i do n't remember the first name , but a , a NN or NN and that they sell ah books in spanish yes . and then you tell them of NNP , eh from mexico , perhaps they have the book of the NN because he , he is , he is , he 's intelligent , he says the he says that the latins speak with a lot of NN ah , yes . instead of with the head . ah . understand ? yes . they say things that you ca n't believe , eh ? yes , no ? yes , that , that he uses is when one when latins come to the united states , eh and they forget how they lived before in their country . and and this is ten thousand times more advanced to what they had in their country . ah , yes . yes , he says things like that , he , he , eh , he says no , he 's crazy , eh how old is carlos NNP , more or less ? what ? how old would he be ? me , me ? no , him , carlos NNP and , he , he has to be at least sixty , something , fifty , something like that . ah , yes . yes , eh , i do n't know , i do n't know , i have n't heard much about him lately , you know but he 's a little old already . ah , yes , eh , old , yes , a little old aha . eh , is of , is of the eh , well , in mexico the majority of the mexicans are mixed race , with indians , eh ? aha . but the ones that are in power are more europeans . eh , with , eh , exactly , all latin america . and , and many of those who are in very racist . yes , also . they 're jewish , they 're , people think that the NNS are only american and european but there are jews , eh , in spain , who speak spanish , you know ? no , yes , there are jews everywhere yes , yes , well everywhere , yes , in spanish . german , ah , yes ? and many italians . yes , argentinians too . and , and the , eh , in cuba , right ? yes . those who had power , those who , who were VBG cuba before NNP was there , right ? it was a NN a cuban , ah cubans , ah , who are jewish yes , i did n't know that NN , that controlled everything and NN , the NN of the people did n't have anything . well , we have to t , we have to talk about telemarketing and that , right ? yes , and NN eh well , what i must say , the day before eh it 's , it 's the same topic , no ? i to , i you yes , yes it 's the same topic , ah i , i , i to , i told you that they have a list that the government has right ? that you could place your ah , did you get into the list already ? no , i yes , i VBP , i , and when it came out last year , i think it came out , that the NN , the government was open , the list , and that you VBP man , you can call a , a , you call , right ? a , a , a phone call of , of eight hundred , you know it 's from the government , and you enter your phone number and they do n't bother you . and they ca n't call you to sell you things they can call you if you VBP them NN , if you what ? if you VBP them money . ah , yes . yes , but RB , to tell you that you come ah , that i want to sell you this or that i want you to come to this , ah , to this NN , that you buy this , they ca n't do that eh , and what did you say ? if you VBP them VB ? is that way you said ? yes , you VBP them money , they can call you , it 's different . ok , no , to learn the , the NNP , yes , yes , i did one eh , '' ' , aha , is that NNP or where is it from ? no , a NN ' , '' ' because NNP ' means money , or POS ' we say JJ yes POS ' and money , pesos no , how interesting , i , i , i would like to learn how they speak in other countries in other countries yes yes , it is like , i was talking to an NNP , you know the banana , right ? yes ah , the , the one you VBP and eat , the banana yes in ecuador , in ecuador they call them '' '' ' , i see , we in chile call NNP ' to the banana . bananas , how you call it ? , the english banana e no , no , there are bananas and NNS , they are different e yes , no , i know they are different , but in chile there are no NNS and bananas , there are just NNS do you call banana both of them ? we call them both NNS , to bananas you call VBZ the bananas ? yes , because there 's only one , and we call it NN . i learned there were bananas when oh . i knew a friend from , from ecuador and , when one leaves their country you learn many things also . oh , yes , well yes because in panama , we we called the NNS , NNS and we called the banana , banana or banana okay ah , eh you call it bananas also or not ? no , we just called it bananas , because we only have that VBP one ah . that that they call here banana . eh , that , eh , that oh , eh , that is what we do n't have the little ones nor the bigger ones . that is that , like a fruit , the bananas are VBN , the bananas are VBN like a , like a fruit , while the eh the NNS are VBN JJ , yes . the NNS , are cooked . you VBP them or , they can be cooked green or something like that eh . ah , yes , see ? that can be done too , to me , when , in ecuador they call it JJ . and how JJ , what is JJ ? and , they showed me a banana , and i said , that 's not a banana , eh ? but one VBZ a lot when , like you say , when one leaves their country . is the same that in , ah , here we have the ah puerto ricans that call , ah well , you , can call it VBZ yes in mexico they call them NNS . in chile we call it VBZ . ah , yes ? these are the red ones , right ? the big red ones . ah , no , for us VBP is like JJ , yes . all , you all , you all say there 's the red NN , the white ones , they 're , the NN that are bigger , white . yeah . cubans all with the , with the NNS , the black NN is what they use , the cubans use a lot and the mexicans use NN , they use VBZ a lot yeah , yes . yes . NNP you call it , yes , we say UH . it 's called NN . oh , yeah ? and the NN , we call it VBZ . okay , but there are certain things that are , languages that are not appropriate , but when you are listening , eh , to some news they use , try to use words that are appropriate . for the countries more , eh understand ? in central america , in argentina , chile , uruguay we use more similar words , put on your NN is more of the indians from the south of , of yeah that 's indian , NN is of the indians , yes yes . sure . eh , eh , because in panama we use more correct spanish , which is possible because panama is very universal , understand ? there are , are many people from all parts of the world in panama , there are , are , are , cubans , there are chileans , there are people from all , from all parts of latin america come to , to panama . yes , a , a , yes , exactly , the spanish in panama is more general eh , is more correct , what it says in the book , because they have to talk a , from different parts , understand ? of the world . mm , because many people there go there by NNS and work for a NN eh and , and when they want to leave their country they , how do you call it ? jump NN aha . jump NN , they leave the NN , hide in panama and stay there for the rest of their life oh , really ? yes , yes , there is immigration , after some time , they come and become panamanian and when you are panamanian it 's easier , before was easier to come to the united states before , right ? yes , it was very easy to come to the united states , because remember , panama is like a NN of the unites states they bought the channel you know hat i mean ? yes , the channel and everything the channel means , eh , panama is a NN of the united states mhm you know what i mean ? the currency in panama was , eh , the currency in NNP , eh , eh , is the united states 's currency and it has always been , banks , VBG is from the united states it 's rather a NN , it 's like a NN of the united states , they think they are an independent country , but they are n't independent , see ? they depend a lot on the united states yes and , NNP says it often , people there do n't know it is better learning from the united states VBP from your own country because if the united states want to , they will cause you problems , if the united states want to , they can kill your government and so that 's right , the united states can kill any government , people there , in latin america , yes , yes , yes and they have done it , yes yes . they have a great influence a NN one , the , the NNS there used to be yes , that 's how they do their businesses , they yes , yes , very dirty NNS before , the united states say stop or leave , and they have to stop because they rule , that 's what NNP says , and people ca n't believe it , but he is right , in that in that matter , eh , but we have to talk about telemarketing telemarketing there 's telemarketing now that call you in spanish also . yes . yes . yes , my sister worked once , like that , ah , they send the people aha , yes , i , i did that for a while too , for a short time , yes . ah , really ? what , what did you sell ? i , i work for sprint oh . you know , sprint the one of the cellular . mm , of telephone . yes , and what did you and what , eh , but before , before there was of long distance , eh now , ah ? of long distance , yes . of long distance . no , if you have a cell phone that 's the JJ thing about the cell phone that if you are calling a person in colorado , in california , right ? that is the same as making a call , a local call . ah ? it depends on the plan that you have . eh , of , all the plans , all the plans are the same , all the plans the distance now in the , in the united states no , it does not exist when you have a cell phone do you understand ? it cost the same to call to california that calling a person that , that that , lives three , three blocks from you , from the place you live . ah , yes , how long did you worked at sprint ? well sprint ah , i worked for a short , i worked only for oh , around four or five months . ah , yes . i had free time , and wanted to make some money but for a time , eh , poor little thing do you understand ? and i talked to people , from sprint eh , sprint distance and how do they do the selling ? they call , how do they get the names ? they have , have a list . yes , but sometimes , sometimes , sometimes you can , eh , make the list of names , sometimes they have a machine that gives you the names automatically . and , eh , sometimes not , they have , sometimes they have a list and a computer , right ? when you sit down right ? when you sit down you have to put a hi hello , yes hi , i 'm JJ from texas , well oh , that 's good , because i was about to hang up oh , ¿yes ? it 's the first time i 'm making a call so i did n't know what to expect , ¿where are you from ? right , uh , from puerto rico puerto rico , that 's good uh huh , uh huh , and you sound like you 're from argentina or chile from chile , of course you 're chilean yes , it shows , our tone VBZ us out . and , ¿is it the first time you call too ? no , no , this is my fifth call oh , and , VB you tell me a little bit of what 's this about ? oh , well , uh , every day there 's a different subject yeah so , they basically give us twelve minutes to talk about that subject oh , ok and they 're studying linguistics , so i believe they 're comparing different accents like , how we speak , people from different parts of latin america oh , perfect , oh , so we have to talk about the subject , ¿is it telemarketing ? mhm , okay , telemarketing and the spam what is spam ? there are many companies that only send you emails to fill up your NN . your NN in your email oh yes , yes , yes , so then we need to have a talk about that ? yes , we need to talk about the VBZ , tv , and cell phones as well . okay you can write down the telephone number so that way they do not call you again . oh , yes , i have a NN NNP okay it is connected to the telephone mhm JJ number , it´s always sales people so you leave a message telling them not to call you anymore . oh , okay . yes but you need to always see the NN NNP okay , okay well , maybe yes , of course okay the government VBZ all the NNS of the different people that calls sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn´t it worked for me , i put my name there on the list yes and , after like thirty forty days i just received one call oh , and which is that list , i mean , how does one apply for that ? the list is on the internet and basically you register you telephone number . okay and then they send you an email and you have to VB through the email they send you and after that they give the companies like forty days to remove you from from their NNS and after that if any company calls you eh , you can VB ah , how good , i 'm going to do it then , and that i look for it on the internet through who mm , mm yes , ah , i do n't remember the , the address also go to a search NN like NN or something like that okay and put there eh , do not call list ah , and there it comes out there it will come out , yes and is that only for the telephone calls or can it also be used for the , the NN the no , email ? no , is only for the telephone calls , that 's one of the questions that it said there that , that we should talk about that , that if we believe that something like that should exist for the email also no , of course that yes , because , is n't it true ? yes , yes mm everyday you open the email , and like twenty five or more emails that should n't be there come out yes yes , yes like that you do n't want , ah yes there are some , some companies , for example my , eh , i have a school email that , this usually does n't happen and they have some really specific NNS on the , the school email yeah but i also have a NN address , and NN also has a lot of really good NNS ah ah , and so everything the think that 's spam yeah ah , they send them , to a different NN so if you want to go to this NN and look over things , you have to VB if you want to read the messages they sent or not ah , but many times also yeah eh , when you sign that you want to receive , i do n't know , emails from a theater or from a story , what you want to receive ah they also send those there , because those e NNS are also sent en FW . sure and so the , the program ca n't VB , so it would be good , i think it would be good if there were this kind of thing also for the internet because of course you would n't have to be looking on the whole list of all the emails that you 're not interested in to find what you want sure , exactly yes , eh , yeah hmm yes so , have you ever had a problem , have they sold you something that has n't been and VBN you have n't asked for something , that has come yes , yes precisely , a little while ago i bought a , i ca n't remember what it was , but it was a , no , i do remember , i bought some VBG NNS mhm through the telephone mhm i see , so , i got them and they said that you had a certain period of time to send them back for a NN and i sent them back the same day when i got them cause i decided not to take them . so , i sent them back that same day through the mail . mhm i see , the problem was that , they said they never got them mm and , and , they said that i did n't return them in time , or they said that i did n't send them back before the end of the NN period , i was able to solve it yes , sure that has been the only time , i used to buy some JJ mhm i see , JJ NNS , JJ medicines , all those kinds of things but i 've never had a problem with that . mm have you bought stuff ? no , i have never , when i get telemarketing calls i immediately , before they even start talking i 'd hang up and not listen to what they had to say i would immediately tell them that i was not interested and i 'd hang up the phone . i see but , but yes , i 've had problems with , with my credit card oh , really ? they also call you once in a while to offer you some product , which is not specifically theirs but VBN by them , and it was , ah , something to oh , i had to get information about my credit or something like this , VBZ most of the times , eh , when i get call from , i do n't know , my telephone company or my credit card company , and there is a period to try the product and see whether you like it , i usually say yes , because sometimes they give you a part of , the person who is doing the call earns money depending on how many people NNS sure , sure so , i tell them yes , for them to have their account , JJ eh , and this time they told me they would call me back if i wanted to keep the product after the thirty day try period i see and they never called , so i thought they had VBN it i see and then i got , i got charged for the service , so i called them and told them i was absolutely sure that the person told me they would call me back to see whether i wanted to go on with the product , right ? , that i would get a call to cancel the product because otherwise i would have said no , because then i forget aha , that they would call you back , i see yes , so , i could n't believe that , that my credit VBN , which is a JJ company because , if your credit card would have done something like that sure at the end , the ended up VBG the charge , but , even so , you have to suffer the bad situation of calling and VBG with the person sure , and VB them , somehow , that you are right , do n't you ? sure , yes , yes sure , yes , is very complicated , the other thing is that it 's scary because i think that any person has access , eh , is n't it true ? mm because you send your card to a part where you want to buy i do n't know , a camera a video and then it turns out that you receive offers from different stores in other words , business of NNS , then they say well and nothing , i have n't said anything mm mm , yes , yes , and you the know the other problem i , that the lady that was talking , because eh , since those days they had the same topic , and i was talking with a lady and , and and i told her , what happens is that there 's a lot of these companies that what they do , they sell the information sure i mean , you buy any product today and no and no , you do n't even know that your information can be sold because eh , they have , by law , the right to sell your information sure , they pass it to others so , then i think they should pass laws that were much more strict and that it would not be possible for someone to sell your information to other companies exactly , only if you want to and it affects that , sure , but if not mm sure the privacy before anything , right ? mm , mm where you send an email and , like an JJ amount , eight hundred emails , JJ amount we say the yes , chileans , right ? instead of eight hundred JJ amount and one that does n't VB that does n't even have any idea of who they are yes , yes no and the problem is that also many of these companies that buy the information yes okay ah , they look for people who are JJ , people who don't exactly , who believe in everything they say yes yes , and , and , and , also since they 're not so used to NNS of companies calling every day , many times there are companies that are fake and then what they do do you know , what happened to me a while ago , ah , i already knew , that they called on the telephone , saying that it was your credit card hmm yeah ? and that it was your company , etcetera , so they said that there had been a charge hmm that was VBN on your card for , eh , a lot of money , like many three hundred dollars , and they wanted to VB if you had made this charge so , eh you say , eh , the person answered and said , no , i did n't make this charge . yeah ? and so they said good , and your number , like , you number is such and such , your address is such and such , social security is such and such , the person says , okay , and your credit card number is this , he said , yeah ? hmm like , you were convinced that the company was really calling you for your credit card , yeah ? hmm they said , the only thing we need to VB is on the back of your card there are four numbers hmm , hmm yeah ? can you give us this number to VB that you 're the person who has n't made this charge ? hmm so the person after everything , that this supposed company hmm i already knew here , she said , my numbers are such and such and with that she was doing a NN mm okay ? and the person would say well , then we are going to take from your payment that you have n't made too JJ , bla , bla , and NN and then the person would find that at the time , ah no , and also they give them a name and a number where it said , eh , i 'm i do n't know , NNP or a person mm already of visa , and this is your NN number and call back if you have any NNS mm and they give them a number in the visa , okay ? the number where they have to call mm so generally the people do n't call mm but this person called and found out that such a thing did n't exist mm okay ? and then he VBD that in all this process , that half an hour already passed , already they had used his card , for more than one thousand dollars wow imagine that , so yes , yes no yes no , they VBP many things and and besides that since they have so much information is very hard to know who is JJ and who is not JJ sure , sure , yes good mm good morning , good evening good morning , good evening , ¿how are you ? ¿who ? , i 'm carmen from chicago , ¿who are you ? yeah , ernestina , ernestina oh , NN where ? new york ok , you know , i 'm fine , i 'm in chicago , but i 'm from puerto rico ¿and you ? , oh , that 's good right , yeah i 've been married for thirty years oh ¿and you ? thirty years yes wow , yeah , i have a husband , [ we 've been married for NN he 's ] twenty years ¿and you ? , wow oh , oh , oh look , ¿do you know today 's subject ? yes it 's about telemarketing and spam yeah is it the first time that you 're speaking here , or not ? well i do n't know no , but , um , have you participated with other people ? yes oh okay , because i 've participated with many people , but you 're the first new one to come out . you no , um , i 've participated maybe seven okay , i have fifteen oh wow look , i 'm going to talk to you about telemarketing okay okay look , i get calls from telephone companies ah to get the offer for five cents a minute . and they , for the long distance , they tell you about long distance , and after they change from five minutes , they change to eight , and after they change to fifteen , and so it keeps going up aha wow you ca n't believe it , so they also call me for the telephone , they call me to talk with the person in charge of the telephone aha always , always , every day , they call me twenty four hours a day . oh yeah so i tell them that he 's never there , that he 's never there and when , the , the other day aha they start again in the morning , they call often to talk with the person responsible for the phone . because they want you to get offers by phone if you want to change company . and they give you JJ NNS why you should change companies . aha yes i let the answering machine answer , when i come from work my answering machine is all full plus the NN NN also full oh boy wow the other day they changed the NN the telephone company changed the number without oh yeah without giving me , without me giving them , without me give them NN , aha and ah , they call me a lot so that i apply for credit cards , insurance credit , well for many things . yes wow a lot , a lot , a lot then also they send me many letters in the mail , the mail gets completely full because i have a NN in my house and i also have a post office box aha oh boy they both get full of letters , NN letters oh no and you ? i do n't have too much problem with that aha you know , maybe , maybe , twice a week , just that . aha , aha they do not call often they never call no , they don´t call me during the whole week oh during the seven days they don´t call no wow , you are lucky they don´t call you very often you are very lucky maybe to check my credit but that´s it you are lucky because they call me every day , every hour oh , no wow and your number is different i have changed my number but they found out the new one oh wow so now i have a email for the NN mail , and i have another one for the important emails wow yes sometimes you have to do that oh no so then i will call to see if i had gotten any calls aha so they do n't keep bothering me , that they call someone else , they do n't keep bothering me . wow so this spam does n't bother me because i do n't use the computer at all . yeah me too , i don't so , but my daughter uses it and she says that sometimes she gets up to fifty NNS and has to be VBG , VBG , VBG oh so that the important ones that she needs can come in . aha wow many , many , many yeah but more it 's this , the NN cards that send you insurance papers , so that oh yeah if the banks want you to be a NN , many , many things . a lot where do you live in chicago ? and , and in chicago , yes oh , is it cold today ? no , it 's ok , it went down to seventy two eighty two seventy two oh oh here but last week it was at sixty yes here also sixty and maybe sixty four , i do n't know . uh the same but there in new york is not so cold right , yes but not , not like here in chicago no , but is JJ is very JJ aha , aha , aha ah you have daughters and sons too ? yes , yes i have a twenty eight year old daughter and a twenty six year old son oh oh and i have a daughter she 's twenty eight aha yes just that , i have , have one oh , a daughter a , a daughter yes aha , oh , oh yeah , and where does your daughter live now , she lives with you ? yes she lives with me , she 's sleeping oh oh because here in chicago it 's ten thirty at night . wow and there in new york , what time is it ? eh , eleven thirty oh , an hour later than here . yeah , oh yeah look so you 're lucky because they do n't call you on the phone or anything yeah and , and you do n't get letters in the NN either ah NN mail or anything no for , like for , credit cards or , for , for you to apply for not many for insurance or something not many or banks or anything no wow you 're lucky , how do you do it ? oh , oh , oh , oh , that 's not good no , no oh , oh , oh because , just figure , you want to have they call you every day every day , seven days a week , i get called wow and they leave me messages in the machine , they leave the numbers in the message NN , once they did n't talk on the machine but yet they left me a number in the message JJ oh yes and i came and called back to see who it was aha and it was a company of NN 's NNS aha , oh , yes to VB with them , that they would send me five for free and afterwards i would start paying aha , oh no and i said no , i am not interested , call later or do n't call at all , but they keep calling , i do n't know what to do what did you do for them not to bother you more ? oh , oh , oh , that 's not good no oh , no , i do n't have those problems but , ¿what did you do so they would n't bother you on the phone ? , or , or send NN mail to your house no , no , no , uh , no , i do n't have a problem with that they do n't even send you letters when children get lost or anything ? letters too , letters too letters too JJ NN from , uh , from where ? they send me letters from everywhere wow yes oh no and they send me papers about the children who are missing , a lot , a lot , a lot right , oh yeah right oh , and ¿did you change your number ? the phone number , i have changed it three times already yeah ? , wow but i do n't know how they get my wow the last , the last letter i got is when i turned fifty , they told me that i had to apply for life insurance aha aha because i turned fifty and , you know , what i do , i put it in the NN aha so that , so they did n't come back to bother me again wow but a girl told me last night who was talking with me , that her grandmother makes her VB up letters ah she does it in the NN in the same NN and she sends them back to them . wow yeah oh boy this means that they should n't bother you , no . ah , ah because there 's a saying that says that for a good understanding , few words are enough . oh no because they do n't understand , they do n't understand in any way . wow tell me what you did so they did n't send you anything ? not , not much but how did you do it ? ah just , just with a letter of credit , just that aha eh , no of maybe aha maybe two two , three maybe two or three uh maybe two or three times a week aha but just that , you say ah no , no , i do n't want to aha well for me is monday , tuesday , wednesday , thursday , saturday and sunday , no , they do n't wait , they do n't wait that it 's sunday that there 's no mail to send me letters . sunday also sunday also , i do n't know how they do it i do n't know and the other time they called me that i had won a car ah wow from two thousand six in two thousand five still . oh and , and it was , it was so that i would give a , a so that i would call them , so that like that they , to waste the phone it had to be . aha aha so that the bill would come bigger . that i had , then also they send me a lot of NN letters . they do n't send you ? wow oh yeah aha , they do n't send you , they do send me a lot of NN letters that i won no hello hello how are you ? my name is auria . what 's your name ? auria . auria ? yes i 'm pilar . pilar pilar , yes . yes , hello , nice to meet you . nice to meet you too , oh and , where are you calling from ? from new york oh , okay , well , i 'm calling from atlanta and it seems to me , mhm that i , i 'm sorry , i 'm trying to get into my apartment but it seems to me that i forgot the door key . wow the , NN well , mm , what was i going to say ? oh , yes , today 's subject is politics , is n't it ? yes exactly you , understand a lot about politics , or not . i honestly do n't . no . i do n't want to say that i do n't care too much about it but i do n't , you do n't follow it much , ah . i do n't follow it much , exactly . well , i do follow politics a little but from my country , not this country , in the united states but i have n't been here that long like to understand the politics here much . the only thing i say is that i 'm a NN , but the truth is , that i do n't trust the politicians too much it does n't matter what party they belong to . yes on that we agree they are not to be VBN not ones nor the others , nor the others from there . yes exactly . the experience is that all the parties already that have the power . exactly do something bad , they always end up VBG up in one thing or another . and well they are VBZ it hurts me to say it , but the truth is that they , they are more JJ with their own interests , and businesses , and NNS . yes and JJ with the , with the law according to what they need RB . yes and not according to what 's best for , you know , the people . sure , yes , yes , yes is true , the times in which the , the people voted and lived the politics so much because they thought that they could improve their lives . because they believed the NNS of the politicians that , that the country , was going to improve the country , the conditions were going to improve . those times have already passed because very few people believe already , i . yes i think that people do n't believe them , they vote because they have to , or you usually have a preference , not yes because you really think it will mean a big change exactly , i always vote RB just because among the two , that is the one that i feel closer , you know , the most important for people for the poor people , for any NN , no matter NN and so i vote that party just because that is their NN , but honestly , it 's been a long time since i they do n't VB that anymore yes , do you think there should be more parties ? but , actually , it 's the same in most of the countries , there is only two big parties and the rest . . you ca n't choose not much more , do you think there should be more ? i think there should not be more than three why not ? and , on second thought , here three is not convenient either , because the third party , the liberal , what 's the name of that party ? the liberal party usually all he does is just VBG the NNS the candidate of their choice , republican or JJ yes to try to waste the mhm the vote . but , i think that , no , i do n't think there should be many NNS because then people get confused , but , afterwards yes , nobody could , eh , VB to be able to VB , really , no nobody , right . exactly , because if you have more than two parties , it means that the other parties have a different point of view to those two and you already start with five or six or six , you know , different points of lives , NNS , well there 's already a lot to choose from and many issues can be confused and imagine there 's going to be a lot of NN the NN is an issue . is an issue that i think is better , the people already prefer not to think about it , because for me for example sometimes i got JJ sometimes when i think about it . is true , but also part of the problem we have it for not voting . you are a NN , i 'm not going to vote for you . and the next , the future NNS already see that the mass NNS , they vote and they try to improve to , you know , to get ahead . yes , yes and those groups that vote up to now well you know have n't done anything as they do n't want to know when their candidate has done something bad . ah , well they 've won the elections , there were so many people that had voted anyway because they do n't start to think really , what is the best , or not . exactly . exactly , and there are many people there are many people that now are starting to say , ah , perhaps he was n't the best candidate and this and that . and that 's all . exactly . yes they have a right to vote , that would be something else . yes , yes , it can be but you , you think ? and up to a local level , do you understand ? NN because , where i live , the city where i live in , they wanted to pass a law to raise taxes , the taxes yes and less than one percent of the city voted so they increased the taxes sure you know , the ones that voted i 'm sure own some businesses and the business people , and they care about that because they are VBN in some way . yes and then the rest are their friends that live in this city , they did n't know what was going to happen and now they are complaining about it . exactly , they are complaining right now and i 'm like , you did n't vote . what do you think ? is there a big difference between republicans and democrats ? i believe they have different faces but indeed they are the same . mhm they have NNS that are different , but in the end everyone votes and this makes them the same yes , the differences are very small , these are just JJ things yes they are the same yes i believe that too but i believe that if the bush administration is doing a government out of the JJ , he is doing things very JJ i think it has always been like that so maybe the CD was not like that yes you know there was the civil rights movement and things like that democrats were very different from republicans mm but that time is gone yes NNS why do you think it has changed ? NN no longer exists between politicians , well that´s what i believe those were the only problems he had before . if also the NNP . s . companies have changed a lot , political parties have also changed mm for the party of the united states . and one sees , and you are born in that , because if your family is such and such , well you are already that and you ca n't change from that , hello , hello hello eh i 'm nicole i 'm from new york eh no pardon i did n't hear you too well , what 's your name ? ah nicole nicole , and where are you calling from ? nicole yes from new york ah my name is any , i 'm calling from miami ah hello , how are you ? yes eh , where are you from ? from miami ah i mean but from what country oh puerto rican and you ? ah okay eh i was born here in new york but my family is cuban ah eh well the topic is the police i did n't understand much what it was saying the only thing that it was of politics yes i mean i think that they said if the republicans and the democrats are really two JJ parties or if they are very similar and if there should be traditional parties aha i mean , more than those two and and how many and how and i do n't know do n't know what what do you think of the politics here in this country eh i do n't know is so complicated mm eh i think that you know is not necessarily the best person for the job who wins but rather the person that has the most money because is the person that mm that can have you know more ads on tv , on the radio sure in you know wherever sure but sure and well also i think that the person that wins is the person that VBZ the interests of the ones that have money i mean the ones that have money move yes the politics in this country so is not only paying the ads but also eh the power in other words match the favor of the of the ones that have money mm , i do n't know i 'm not too you know of politics or anything of that mm because it has its good thing and the bad , each one mm but you know i 've never gotten too much into that mm i vote when eh you know it 's time to go vote but no and also when i go to vote i always try to educate myself mm to whom i think would be the best person for the job but mm i 'm not one of these people that you know that read the newspaper , watches the news or whatever to see what is happening with the politics . mm but i do think that we have to give the eh respect and NN to the office mm what i want to say with this is how the office of the president mm can be that i eh do n't like what they are doing . mm but at the same time is the president and i do n't see mm anything , eh good that comes out of the people that VBP the president because that does n't help mm the only thing that does is that it divides mm you know we are going to say the people mm and it is of no help , no , no , no , that wo n't help , do you understand what i 'm saying yes yes but , you know , it 's like all those things that took place when the hurricane VBD new orleans , i mean , people started saying good or bad things of the president , whatever m but they were n't helping the people of new orleans m they were just VBG the president but if they go and say that the president is doing something wrong , well , then they should tell him what to do , do you understand what i 'm saying ? yes , oh , i 'm sorry , i do n't , i mean , i think lots of people that were VBG the president were also helping mhm i mean , people from this country , i mean , they were VBG money to people or they were giving them clothes and and and mhm a place to live , and VBD their homes and NN i do n't know , they went there to help i mean , to say that people were not doing anything is JJ , i mean , some were VBG too but i mean , i think they were right in doing so , i think yes they were right in complaining , i mean , they were complaining because not much was being done and i think it was necessary for them to complain and do something yes , that 's what i mean , to complain about the president and do n't do anything , i mean , i believe they were doing something , if you do n't agree with that , then you should complain and do something , i mean , if you complain and do n't do anything is just wrong , you must change things yourself so i do n't think they should sit and waiting for the next elections to take place in four years because in the next election , something similar might happen and you really ca n't trust that the politicians are going to do things honestly and legally , so i 'd say that people should complain and i think they should continue complaining and to do more things i mean it 's more difficult now to do more things , it ' harder if you are a normal person , oh , i mean , you ca n't do the same job that the president should be doing but you can try , i mean , you can try to do something from where you are , but , oh , but i do n't know , i mean , i do n't completely agree with what you just said about people not being able to VB him because i believe that when you see that something is wrong , you should say it i 'm not saying that they should n't VB but i believe the can do it but i do n't like it when people start oh complaining and speaking bad things about others without VBG a solution sure if they want to say something , you know , it 's not a good idea to do this or whatever , then they should give a solution sure because if they do n't then only thing that happens is that other people start , oh , you know to be on the NN and this happens , i believe that when someone VB another person without VBG a solution , they VBP the situation sure they do n't help and that 's what i did n't like , i saw a lot of people saying this is wrong but you know mhm they did it but at the same time , they did n't VB a solution sure the only thing they did was complain but what could they do , i mean , the problem is that they are not part of the government so it 's harder for them to do something , i mean mhm i did n't like too much how bush eh VBD to the situation in in new orleans i mean i think that he really was like a lack of of mm it was like having a country without a president in that situation i mean RB he like did n't do anything but since i do n't know what i could do except give money i mean i could contribute money to the effort of helping the people there or could mm go go over there ah ah ah work there i mean to work in the effort or VB some of my things i mean like VBG some things of mine but no i ca n't do the work that he should be doing mm , i 'm not the president , him i do n't know is like i do n't know , i do n't know is hard , is hard being a NN because one has to make a lot of decisions and always the people are looking at you like to VB i mean the people are never satisfied with what the president is doing any president i mean the people are always full of NNS but , but i do n't know sometimes i think that that also in a certain way like it keeps keeps like alive an environment of thinking mm that if the people stop VBG in other words stop complaining and VBG like the people stop VBG a lot and in NN that can be very dangerous also yes yes in a situation where the people continue without VBG like there could be very bad things mm so now a lot of complaining and little NN does n't do much yes is better to complain and do and act but i do n't know well is also better than in other countries mm sure because at least one can , one has the option of being able to complain and can say whatever one wants sure not in other countries so far but probably they will take that away from us also very soon but i do n't think so , because of the constitution that we have i do n't think that will happen i do n't know , i do n't know well the i mean that movement of ah what is it called i forgot the name of this movement that they can they can see eh all the things that one does ah i forgot what is called , well but there 's been a lot from september eleven there 's been a lot of movement of taking away the rights of the people i mean especially if one is an immigrant here be careful like one says because you are seeing right that you are seeing in the house a person like that anyone but if they have any NN if one sees a muslim or i do n't know i mean eh , i think it could be dangerous to say what one thinks and in this country in the past it was very dangerous to say what one was thinking in the NNS i mean the people absolutely had no right to say what they thought because if one if they VBD that one had VBN thoughts they could take you out of your house i mean i think that yes the constitution well i well i defend the constitution a lot but i think that it is very i mean in practice that constitution is not VBN as much hi hello . to whom do i have the pleasure of speaking ? hi , i 'm JJ , from philadelphia ah , i 'm in philadelphia too . my name is silvia . ah , that 's good , i VBP , maybe we spoke the other day ? ah , eh , about about spain , and , yes , yes , yes , ok , your voice VBD familiar . very well , how are you ? spain , yes , yes , exactly , yes , yes , yes , yes . very JJ , JJ eh , eh , your name is NNP ? NNP , yes , NNP , a , i , a what it 's a NNP name ah , it 's , i , uhm , i was going to ask , because , it 's very pretty and i have never heard it before yes , thank you . it 's a pretty common name in catalonia , but outside of catalonia , it 's not . of course not . ah , and , and , does it mean something , or well , not to my knowledge , some people use it as , as a short form of NNP , which is barcelona 's NN NN ah ah , but in my case , i 've always been named NNP , with the short form , so to speak ah , then you originally come from there are people named NNP who use NNP as a short form , you know like , uhm , like a JJ yes , exactly , but in my NN it does n't put NNP , it puts NNP directly um , um , how interesting , for me , everything related , to , the languages VBP my attention um , um , yes , yes but you are from catalonia , yes , you told me that you were from barcelona , yes yes , yes , yes , i 'm from barcelona , yes yes , talk to me of , of the difference of the people let 's say from barcelona , to the people from madrid well , all complicated , let 's see , um there 's a lot of difference i think at a level , well . at a linguistic level , or at a political level um , um and of being , very JJ , that gives them a certain bad NN sometimes , in the rest of spain yes , uh , uh , um . and and well , there has been some NN because this new constitution , lets say , NNS catalonia as a nation which is part of spain , no , a nation within a state , yes what does that mean ? well , it means that in certain areas , like in education , or certain economical NNS , i mean , there will be more JJ , lets say , catalonia has a she has a special place within spain oh oh it will be more JJ than other regions , lets say , well , in spain , they call it history regions . oh . yes , NNP , too , well , they have , they have their own language , what happens is that NNP , is much more , lets say the difference have VBN and the language of NNP is the NNP , it 's similar to VB , it 's original from the people of , um , um NNP , yes yes , NNP and NNP , they are quite similar , it 's really difficult to VB which one is which yes yes yes , like no it 's a NN , no , you could almost say that they are NNS of the same language , yes , yes , yes , yes yes , um , um , um , um , um while , well the basque is completely different lets say it has nothing to do with it and NNP is a NN language yes , totally , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , um , um but , that , more different from the NNP , which is also becoming NNP a little , for all , for all the JJ contact that there is um . yes . and , and , what types of NNS , eh , of , of JJ NN , does catalonia have that NNP does n't have for example ? um , for example . catalonia has its own politics , the national NN is different in catalonia than in the rest of spain and , and , and the rest of spain NNS a national policy ? exactly , the , our country has its own police , catalonia has its own police , and the rest of spain has a common one , so to speak um , um . ah , um , um . and how much is taught in NNP and how much in spanish ? um , well for example , i , in my case , i studied everything in NNP , except the subject of spanish but all the subjects i did them in NNP , and that , that is the NN , what happens is that some schools , that well , teach the spanish . but the NN is that all is in NNP , except the subject of spanish , what happens is that catalonia is a very bilingual society , then you hear the NNP and spanish RB in all parts , you hear it in the street , yes , NNP , spanish , the television has both , i do n't know , there 's , there 's a lot of NN . do they also maintain the language ? um , not so much , not so much . um , um . everyone who 's more or less from a JJ family or even , no , it 's really easy to VB the language and to learn yes , yes , yes , um , um . in exchange the , the basque country not so much , even the basque president i think does n't know how to speak basque , and , and it 's a president of a national party , um , JJ , like , FW basque ah . um . and is there someone , there is n't , but , are there NNS of people who speak it as a first language ? the situation is a little , well , less VBN , but , yes they speak it and there are schools RB in basque i think , but few and there 's a movement , eh , to get bring the basque back more , i imagine that this would be part yes , um , i do n't know , the basque country has a government , well , a NN , JJ basque , but i think , like in NNP , um , i do n't know , the language is something really important to us and we give it a lot of weight , i think that in the basque country this is n't as important , i think that ah , how strange . all day we 're like this . and , and i think well , neither , but i think that in the basque country they do n't talk about it as much of this topic . yes , what happens is i think is that they have it as , have , i think they have the NNP as very JJ , already like something of theirs also yes , um . and , well , that 's the impression that i get , i could be wrong . yes , and , and , the basque government now what relation does it have with the NNP as , as far as its political NNS . ah , let 's see , the , um , the party in charge in the basque country is , um , ah , national party , is called the basque NNP party is , let 's say , of middle , middle right perhaps , middle but , i mean , they do n't , do n't give , do n't give support to the violence at all , they , well are against the violence , are against the NNP ah , what happens is that , um , that yes that , yes that they have an NN , well , um , JJ plus NNS , and then already , in the basque country there 's another party that it is like the , the NN , the political NN of the NNP so to speak , that they are , well , they do n't VB the NNS , they have a , have a much more JJ attitude , towards the violence um , um and these people were , in fact , under um , the , under the NNP government , the president that there was before in spain , they VBD that party , we VBD it . and , um , but this people well , well continue , they have changed names , and i do n't know what , i mean , they continue being there . and , and now with the change of the government , i mean the , the old one the president that there was before , with the party that there was before , they did n't talk with the president of the party , of the basque country , they did n't talk to each other , then , let 's say that it was hard to advance in some solution because they did n't talk to each other and , and , and they did n't talk with the president ? NNP , did n't talk with the president of the basque country , they did n't talk to each other , yes they were like , i do n't know , three years without meeting , JJ um , um . um . um . and now , with JJ new government , at least they do NNS , they do meet , i mean , mm , there are still differences , right ? but um , um , and in spain , how do they see NNP ? well , in spain it is seen as something terrible , i do n't know , like something ca , that , NN , NNP first appeared during NNP 's NN , so yes , yes maybe at that moment it made sense , because well , there was a NN and , i do n't know , they had been through some really tough situations and , i do n't know , maybe in that JJ moment it had a reason to be , but now , most of the people , mm , think that in a democratic society it has no room , when there can be democratic parties who defend all those ideas , right ? , in catalonia there are parties who , JJ parties but who just do n't use violence um , um , um , um um , the problem is , the right thing is that , that in the basque country NNP does have some social support , because otherwise otherwise it would not have VBN , right ? i mean , this people , NNP , i do n't know right , yes hello , good evening . good evening . how are you today ? fine , and you ? ah , fine , thanks . what 's your name ? ah , my name is i 'm norma from here atlanta , georgia , and where are you from ? on , in new york , my name is NNP . ah , okay . okay okay , do you have , girls or boys ? yes , i have boys , i have two boys one is seven and the other oh . three oh , you are very young , right ? young . mm , not exactly , i 'm forty one years old oh , boy and me , i 'm forty eight years old ah , you see , we are there more or less yeah right ? and i have a daughter , she 's twenty eight years old . aha . yes . yeah . yes , we VBD today . and what about you ? what do you think about politics ? yeah , sorry , i do n't know a lot about politics , so eh , no , you talk to me about it . well , i really , particularly , do n't like politics much . really ? no , there are always these fights between democrats and the , eh , with republicans who say one thing and another thing and you really , many times , do n't know who 's right ah . yeah . because there are always NNS about different topics , no ? that that well , have different ideas , no ? yeah . but no , and you , yes , i 'm really not into politics and neither no really ? and me too . no , no i only say that i listen to the news . no ? that , eh , here i see the news on television , and there 's always , no ? always yeah . yeah . they always discuss different , eh , different NNS , no ? that bring right . try to put , no ? things on the eh things so the laws to they VBP the country , but many hmm . hmm . right . and , and , um , what do you , what do you ah are ? which political party ? ah . hmm . do you too ? hmm . hmm . ah . of course , of course , yes , there are many people that many politicians that really get advantage of their influence , right ? of their power and there is so much hmm aha . right ? no , that could , could be seen any moment , right ? for the in each country , right ? always things happen yeah . strange things with the politicians yeah . but well , it is like that , right ? when people VBP to a powerful position , always there is , the NN to abuse of their power ah , right ? that it starts to drive to VB other people yeah aha right ? ah , that 's not good , JJ mm and oh , what , who is ah mm mayor , the mayor ? here ? yeah . eh what 's the name ? that 's a lady who is eh , is a lady oh , a lady . yes , is a , is a woman oh , i do n't remember , the mayor here from atlanta . oh . the governor is NNP NNP who 's a republican but that the majority of the people are aha . do n't agree with that , right ? that 's he 's taken many wrong NNS here in georgia really ? right ? with the laws and really no eh , there are n't people that , well , that voted for the NN , because there are NNS , after many years , right ? a a republican . mm . he took , he was a governor mm , mm of georgia because for many years the democrats had been oh . but so , i mean , it seems to me that people are kind of VBN with him now , no ? he has n't really done a lot of good things for the state , no ? mm it has n't VBN the state that much , above all the people , the teachers and the mhm . state workers are not very happy with him so i do n't think he will be VBN , i hope he 's not . yeah i do n't like him neither . do you know the name of his wife ? she is ' , oh , i ca n't remember you know , and no , but she is good , well oh she is among the best women in the whole country , no , one of the best but i ca n't remember her name oh , no NNP , yes , her last name is NNP NNP ? oh , we here have NNP . aha . and i do n't , oh , i do n't know oh , oh , no , oh , i do n't know much . lots of corruption , you know ? so , that 's why i do n't like it mhm . sure , yes . and yes , i believe that lots of people are not interested in politics , i hear about it in television . yeah . right ? news , no ? that 's what happens with politicians . yeah , yeah , right ? and NNP , do you like NNP ? no ? and well , it 's not about me liking her oh . but my husband works here and when i , when i came here i was single so i married him and he works here and our children were born here and are being raised here , so well yeah , yeah right now , no , he 's here , he has a JJ job , so mm , and we are here for now yes , and but i 'm open to any change , so aha . if i can go to another place , i do it and bush , do you like him ? huh ? bush . NNP ? bush , the , NN president bush . you do n't know him ? eh , bush , hmmm , george bush . ah , bush . oh , george bush , no , no i do n't like him president bush . he 's had some hits yeah . true . no ? but , like , in the majority of cases , above all in this iraq war , i think that many people are against his decisions , no ? no , he 's really , eh , only spending the taxes of the american , no ? in , in like , all this , this money , no ? there 's many people who are suffering here in america and all this money that 's going to this war in iraq , it 's completely ridiculous . yeah , yeah no it 's really , it 's really , it 's ridiculous and besides there are so many people who have died , for the pure okay yes , so he is very young yes , i do not agree with him , right ? yeah i think he only works on his own , not to help others what about me ? yes , the last one was here the JJ katrina oh , really ? it destroyed new orleans okay it was a disaster right ? because oh , yes no , they did not VB NN . oh , no the people have suffered a lot everywhere . that´s truth here on georgia we have a lot that´s bad many people lost their homes ah , yes . ah , yes , how bad . no i think that in texas and in many places ah . also , right ? people that have gone from new orleans yeah . because really is , is a disaster there . VBD many , many problems , right ? yes , many problems . but up to now is , up to now , that 's already a big NN up that it has given him , right ? like it says yeah . and you know that now eh , uh , another problem also sure , another problem , although with that already , they already had the election the first , i think , and they gave no at least they VBD more quickly yeah , ah , no , right ? yes , is very fast mm . but , you know is a big problem in ah well , really , yes , is a new , new orleans and ah mm . ah , ah , louisiana , right ? yes . louisiana , NNP ah . mm , everything is , yes , is a disaster , right ? yes . really the majority , i think that , i mean , the people the people that live here that i mean , the majority of the people are not rich , right ? right . the majority of the people are middle class and lower aha then i think that it 's VBG the people more , right ? of middle class and lower we are suffering more , right ? yeah . that the , other people , because the people that have money do n't even feel it , goes up , goes down and there 's not much aha . and do you have a car ? yes , i have a car . oh , i do n't have a car , i don't ah , you do n't have a car i do n't have yes , i have a car , that 's why i know , because now for instance , gas has increased how much is the gas ? here it is , eh , right it must have raised already to three dollars and some oh , my goodness , regular ? regular NN ? yes , yes , because right now went my husband to buy gas oh , no then , a lot , a lot of gas stations had no gas because they always save it , right ? they wait for it to raise yeah for the price to raise to start selling it mhm and some , some were selling it , but at two ninety nine already , so tomorrow it may be at oh , goodness , mm three and some oh my goodness mm that 's not good , what kind of car have you got ? oh , i have a NNP NNP oh mhm oh , the new one no , it 's not new , it 's from ninety six , but it 's good , it 's fast , it 's not oh , yeah uh huh i want a car , but it 's very expensive , you know , i do n't have the money , oh , you know , that 's not good for me , uh , the gas right the gas is really expensive yeah , gas is very expensive , it 's too expensive uh huh no , and my husband is so used to the car now and i tell him `` you can go on the bus NN '' ¿right ? , to a certain point to get to work , then you take the train from there oh and , he says `` no , i do n't have the patience to wait for the train or the bus here '' oh '' in atlanta , because they take , i mean , they take too long to come '' oh , you live in atlanta ¿right ? yes , in atlanta oh , ¿is it cold [ there ] ? no , it seems right now we 're . . . it 's changing a little , it has rained a little bit and it 's kinda colder but yeah , yeah we are about seventy six , so hi hi , ¿how are you ? fine , ¿and you ? VB ? uh , my name is NNP , uh , i 'm in texas you 're in texas uh huh well , uh , this is vicente , and i 'm in new york in new york , ok yes , i was , i was listening to what we have to talk about yes i believe it said we have to talk about politics yes , it was a bit difficult to understand everything it was saying , but uh , i think we have to talk about politics and whether it 's right or wrong that there are only two parties and , and more or less the difference between both parties , ¿right ? yes , yes something like that and then it went on about too many things they 're looking for yes , yes it 's enough about the difference , but then it started talking about a party . . . something , i did n't get what was RB in question , ¿you know ? yeah , i did n't understand much of what it said yes because i , and one , one and he had this gringo accent yes . but the thing is that he says that the difference between the two parties , that 's my understanding ? do you understand ? one is more liberal and the other is conservative . mhm . sure . but oh , the other , he then VBD with something else that i did n't understand . i could n't understand it from there , do you ? yes , yes , yes . but i thought it had to do with politics , democrats and republicans , oh . aha . that democrats are more liberal and the republicans are conservative . mhm . and that many of the situations are both because you ca n't be , you ca n't be too liberal right ? mhm . liberal is good , but it does have some bad things too . yes , yes . and the NNS , if they are too conservative then they do n't help people and there can be trouble with that , do you understand ? yes but i think the politics in the united states , RB , there has always been two main parties , it 's divided in two parties . even if someone is running for a political position and has different ideas , they can run because the parties have so much power that if you are not a democratic or republican candidate you basically wo n't have a chance to win , to win that position . i think this has limited the political life in the united states , it has VBN it from being NN . do n't have enough votes to get to any position . do you understand what i 'm saying ? there 's there 's there 's a social party , there 's a party of the working people . all that exist , i 'm telling you the truth that it exist ? but no , i i know they exist , but eh , but basically they are JJ NN because they have n't be able to people because if the people don't have n't been able mm , yes yes yes . yes yes yes . yes , yes , mm . he had a lot of money , a lot . money means money , understand ? so he himself could pay . he did n't need any other person . but he got got really on top there , close to the to the republicans and the democrats three parties had close to three parties to vote understand ? but still the republican won , understand ? but i 'm telling you like that that yes eh parties exist . this is the united states , you ca n't for what if no other party exists . still they all need the vote of a certain amount of people eh . to VB , understand ? to be VBN . the thing is now , to win is another thing . understand ? to win you have to do something else so if you yes you you think that you have to be like right ? that had money for him to pay his own propaganda understand ? yes . eh , you have that type of money another party perhaps you arrive and perhaps one of these days there could be a NN from the independent , or the family , or of the workers ' party . mm , mm but the thing is that the republicans right ? and the democrats are so big that it 's impossible to get to any other part you need to have a very big idea , understand ? sure , that 's what i 'm saying that for that for ah for JJ and traditional reasons the united states has VBN only two parties that are majority . yes . and in the JJ NN they have n't given the opportunity to any other party of no , no , no . they give it but it does n't make it . it does n't make it , but it exist . this in the united this is one of the most liberal countries in the world , see ? ah . you want to start a a party a party if you want to start a political party today see ? you can start it today . yes , sure , yes yes , i understand that . no , yes , yes . yes , oh sure sure . i 'm not i 'm not saying that the laws VBP you that no that no oh , exactly the law VBZ that to happen , i 'm just saying that the people in the united states exactly , the people they have n't given another party the chance to reach power as the democratic and republican parties have aha . right , the vote system has been the same ever since the country was VBN . it has not changed . mhm . look , it has n't changed because it 's the most perfect one in the world , but are they saying the truth ? are they ? is it the most perfect one or they are not changing it , look , i can tell you right now mhm . that if you want , right ? i can get to , name a person , name a person , NNP NNP , he 's not alive , he might be alive , he can become president of the united states . and and . no , no , in the united states , money is more important do you understand what i 'm trying to say ? when you are a leader , leadership is very important , do you understand ? no , leadership , sure , leadership is important . the thing is that the state 's leadership , i mean , in the united states is established in part of the do you know what leadership is ? leadership if people like you or not . that 's why , that 's why a lot of not exactly , and that is the most important hollywood artist have VBN to become president or governor no , not exactly , because the NN of a NN of a leadership is more important than a book . you ca n't learn that in a book . i ca n't , i ca n't learn how to be a leader . that is not possible , understand ? the , eh , the boss of , there VBP n't no book you can read yes to learn that because i may be the most ignorant person in the world mhm but have the NN for people to see me as a good thing , then i can manage to be the president , understand ? i agree with you , one hundred per NN . leadership is that , that is the most important thing . when you get to a certain level no , no , no , i agree . leadership is a NN that exactly but if you are going to be a political leader , mm , there are other things that are as important as being a good leader you must know of economy , you must know of laws , you have to , and all that you have to study no no no no no no , i 'm absolutely in agreement with you because you know why . when i 'm leadership , right ? i can have NNS that tell me what i can do , and what i can say to people . i give you NN , i can have good NN . look mm , yes , yes , yes . you understand me ? if you are not of european descent , you ca n't become one , even though the population mm , mm hmm , mm . is indian or mixed race , are in the majority , you see ? you ca n't get there in any other place . hm . i do n't believe that . i 'm not in agreement . i believe that there are european countries that have much better . there is a man , there is a man , there is a man the rest of the world sees right now . the majority of the world , right ? they notice the united states , especially in european countries . now you have another person . aha . i 'm tell you that there are many laws that because it 's more advanced that the rest of the world , you see ? and people of the world , the rest of the world does n't know . is there a , where are you from ? the rest of the world does n't know this . there are european countries that much before the united states gave the right to vote to women . okay ? no , the politics of many european countries are much more advanced than the united states . let me tell you the united states but much more advanced than any other country because , you know why ? because RB , the united states is one thousand years more advanced than no . i ca n't compare their politics with the united states . i ca n't compare it , you know ? hmm , yes . in the , in the united states the system is more important than the president . you know ? remember i could NNP NNP president of the united states . and it can be JJ because the united states system is the most JJ in the world . no , i agree with you that many countries in the world look to the united states and are jealous with the system in the united states well of course , no ? because but because it is a system that is JJ and NN . and here , who wants eh , the JJ system , yes and wants to VB the others and stand on everybody , i have the chance to do it and become rich no , eh , eh , the and that , everybody , everybody is jealous of that . if you come here and want to make money , you can make money and you can VB other people , and you can stand on other people , you can do it no , some people do it right , it 's alright there is a country in the world , there is a country in the world who gives money to the rest of the world , if i have to tell you what country is that then you are in not in earth . there is a country that gives money to the rest of the world , do you know which is that country ? NNP are a lot , there are a lot of count that is the united states good evening i 'm joe hello hello , i 'm JJ oh NNP from new mexico . well yes yes we 've talked like three times we 've talked , that 's good i really like to talk a lot with you , how nice . how is everything fine ? yes everything is fine . and the weather is changing over there ? what ? the climate , is changing in new mexico or is it still hot there ah no , no yes , well , the last , three days it changed . there was a lot of rain and and ah , well the temperature went down a little no . yes and what do you think of politics NNP ? well , is , is a is something very ah , is very , is very hard to talk about the , the politics , because , i mean there are many things that . that one has to , that one has to think of no , ah um but that , i i think that the , the situation of , of our country . oh , yes , i think that between the republican party and between the NN you see something good in reality , but i think that now the is worse with the situation RB . because things have VBN a lot with the republican party , right ? with that of the war and the price increase and , the way in which , the issues are VBN , like this of the NNS that passed . and the corruption that is now VBG , now from the republican NNS in the NN . yes , i think there 's been corruption , for example with what happened , in no , that so much happened but the other , that president bush won this , depending on the florida votes , and i do n't know like that , in reality for a few votes , well the vote of the whole nation was decided . sure . yes instead of doing it by , what is it called , by NNS , NNS , by however . i know that they should all count like that , that the majority wins , in reality that the majority wins and not that it wins , yes because that does n't count , it should n't count like that . no i was very JJ , with how the NN is and , and where they go walking , and yes , yes um and do you believe in the NN of other parties , do you think they should make more parties or ? um i think so , there should be more parties because , well yes they have three strong parties yes and also they have an , institution that , is like , like , goes checking , all the parties , that we do n't have a , a , national institution that is like it is part of the parties to VB all yes to check for VBG or not as the two parties are very powerful republican and NNP yes the influence is very large in the american people but sometimes is not enough for both parties sometimes they take advantage yes now there is much more division then before , people VBP with many things the nation is divided for example louisiana is a poor area you can not compare houston and RB . because the president is from there for example in texas things got better super fast , not as many people who died in louisiana truth who died in louisiana and NNP yes , yes . they are powerful parties and control everything yes not only NNS , but there are also government NNS that must VB yes , yes for example NNP took too long to take NN when hurricane katrina was JJ they took a long time to close something yes they VBD very , very slow . yes it is sad . and which parties VBP new mexico ? well it is , one of the , of the , of the states of NN , right . of the oh , yes so , yes but in general i think that it is more than , the NN . i don´t know when they VBN to do this , and i don´t know how much , helps , for example , in colorado so , i think they were going to have more . power in the votes . the last time , didn´t , didn´t work because they did not have it was not so organized and the did not have , the NNS they wanted to have and give more power to colorado . compare to other places like NNP , new york , texas . yes that have much , that have more power in the vote and i don´t know those things well of course , they affect . the question , is like i was thinking about here in colorado . yes , yes , yes it must be . for each district . imagine that every district has a vote for the JJ college , ¿right ? and they must , uh , be VBN , ¿right ? , instead of being , uh , most of them win , they all win , like yeah they definitely need to improve the system but yes regarding that uh , well , last semester right i studied uh , politics , ¿right ? , and there are two states who did change their laws , ¿right ? yes nebraska and NNP are like that yes but i think that they always , they always go to , uh , main , always , because it 's always NNP , and nebraska always goes JJ i think , but yeah , they do have , they do have laws that votes can be VBN , ¿right ? that the majority of votes count , that 's what they say yes oh i mean , that they can VB their NNS like that , if , if bush wins in a district oh wins a vote , but if for example NNP wins , another , but of , of the same state . he can win that JJ vote . oh i mean is , is more fair like that . sure . yes like that , is not fair . exactly . and i also think with NNS for big NNS , like for example JJ court NN , well that only is picked by the president i think that there should be another way of VBG that because . the president is always going to pick someone who VBZ towards his party . and someone who VBZ his political system . you understand me ? but that does n't necessarily , mean that it 's for the well being of the nation is that all the influence . um , oh , ¿do you speak spanish ? and you ? uh , i 'm pilar ¿where from , pilar ? from new york too RB ? , wow , i 'm in queens , ¿where are you ? in manhattan oh , wow , that 's good um uh , you ca n't understand very well what these people are saying , ¿right ? , i know no , the truth is i do n't , but well , i understood the subject was politics yes , yes , yes , and , ¿where are you from ? spain oh , NN , wow , that 's good . all my grand parents are from spain , from the south NN ? yes , my , my grandmother was from the NNP NNP um , uh huh so , i , i , i have gone to spain many times , i love madrid , barcelona , NNP ¿yes ? NNP , yeah , ¿how long have you been here pilar ? one year oh , NNP ? , VBP one year ? , and how different do you find it oh , the truth is it 's completely different yeah , ¿right ? , but you , ¿you lived in madrid ? yeah but well , well , the only thing is that the night starts later than here the night and everything , lunch , dinner yeah , yeah , and there 's no NN ¿where is there no NN , there ? in , uh , there 's no NN here oh , there 's no NN here , no in spain there is yeah , although so , well , and ¿what do you think about politics ? , well , i imagine spaniards have many opinions about politics um , well , i do n't know about the NNS , i do n't have much no man , i have an opinion on spain , but here in the united states hmm . i do n't know the parties yes yes well , they 're the democrats and they 're the or anything they 're the republicans and and little more , no ? no , we do n't know which of the two is worse , no ? they both have their good things and they have their bad things . but well , and in spain , the no in spain it 's , man , i do n't know what the difference is between the parties , but there are also two that are the most important yes . that are , they 're called the popular party hmm . and the socialist party aha , aha . spanish worker and , they 're pretty different , the truth is that they VBP the country in a way yes . i think that more than anything to VB one another yes , yes i think RB when you 're in the government , the others do n't do more , they complain about anything they do yes . and when they themselves eh are in the government they dedicate to , VB all that the last government has done yes . to be contrary , i think so exactly that , yes , here , here is more or , is the same . it is the same here . yes , right ? yes , yes . and the democracy , i don´t know , really if , if you could call democracy when the elections yes . so when the parties those you can choose or not you do not like any , yes , well yeah yes . not specially , eh , see for example here even when i am in favor of the because the truth is that it has made many good things the mayor of this place hmm . has been very good . originally he was RB but he changed to republican hmm . and well , and now , acts like with , like a liberal , many times yes . so , then , wait a second hello ? hello ? yes , so that , you do not VB , so there is not a pure thing there , right ? yes , no , no , it is not VBN , but at least him has been good for the city eh of course because in this election are going to spend much money on tv NNP NNS and NNS NNP , yes that is very sad now there is only one coming out every day in the newspaper first thing he said is that god would make him win the election because he said that it was in JJ hands all this week was a mistake , so everyone looks at him like a clown and what is its name ? oh , NNP NNP ? he is JJ , from the bronx okay yes , he is a clown here in the united states people VBP very much well , it has gotten better good people no longer VBZ both parties this city is a NNP , yet he is a republican , they are tired of democrats they have raised taxes yes so we have a mayor who is a republican what is his name ? so he is also republican so you VBP to be more of the center , right ? yes , exactly they VBP each other yes , yes , so , well , and so i guess you miss a lot spain eh , well , on one side i do , but on the other side there so many good things here that i do n't have much time left to miss yes , yes , look , we have a , we have just VBN the kitchen , and i found , online , a boy who is good at painting , eh , mm , and NN and everything , but really good , really good mhm and he said , look , john i love my country and i miss it a lot but this country is giving me the chance to work hard , i have my car , i have my apartment that i have almost paid and he is here , i think he has been here for three years , he is , he has n't been here too long yes but he works hard , he is VBG his money and he says RB i have the chance IN there i could n't , because when it was not the taxes it was some other thing yes , the situation in spain is very bad for the young people and could not , and so that 's how it is because salaries are , although the NN for living , i mean the cost of living has raised a lot yes because , because of the JJ yes when we changed to VB , everything raised , up to a seventy percent yes , yes , wow some things went up wow . and , but the salaries did n't go up at all . mm . they did the fair NN to the salaries but not to the prices yes . then the salaries are very low and that 's the first problem , right ? yes , yes . but the second problem is that the houses , the eh , the price of the houses mm . ah , has been increasing since many years ago to some prices that are RB high that nobody can afford to buy , i mean the people that that can buy a house are only the ones that are , charging with the housing yes , yes . the ones that buy , the ones that buy houses to rent or to VB yes . they ca n't pay the house yes , that is what has happened here now in new york in the last five years , the prices have been double yes . there are n't many NNS , so they are n't very expensive and , and , and here they 're really expensive , really expensive and you have n't tried to find something outside of manhattan ? no , i 'm studying in a university . or you do n't like it ? ah , what university are you in ? en , in colombia . ah , wow , ah , you 're in JJ sure , yes . yes , but up , up there , up there in JJ you can , washington you can get , eh no , the , the university ones are cheaper , but , that 's why i 'm here , but yes . yes , yes , no , eh , they're almost JJ in the lower part of new york , they 're simply expensive , almost yes , yes . and , but in spain there 's a tradition of , of buying the house , people do n't like to pay rent because it 's money NNP away , yes , exactly . because they ca n't , because they both have to work , the husband and the wife , and they ca n't have kids hmm . have kids and their family and little more , well it 's that , you ca n't do this in spain . yes . and , and god willing the parents give them a little money to start , no ? unless the parents are rich . so the situation is very bad , and this is why , people are going like out in europe hmm . well many people are leaving wow , um . and that 's one thing that those politicians right ? that had to solve it and is always being VBN yes . that are houses that they build and they sell them quite a lot cheaper . is a disaster wow , uh . wow , listen tell me , have you found a good restaurant here ? mm , i have n't looked . you have n't looked ? i 'm going to recommend you one , is one that 's in , that 's in the street eh , in the NN and first NN in JJ street and first NN , mm . really ? i mean that is basque or , or is yes , NNP . there , you will feel with , with your JJ NNS very good , eh , is very , how do you call it ? eh for the young people , right ? and they serve very delicious , the , the NN are very delicious and is very , what 's the word ? is very eh , fantastic . right ? eh , ah , i 'm looking for another eh , eh , JJ yes . ah , uh . is very JJ you will like it . yes , so , i recommend you by up there , by up , IN the only thing there is are dominican restaurants and and there 's still some cuban ones left , which are quite good , but spanish , that i know , by up there no no there is n't , but NNP , if , if you have the chance of going with your friends eh , to VB , you will like it a lot okay , okay , well i 'll go , i 'll go to see . because that gets full of , of spaniards well here in the university there 's also a lot of spaniards , that no , yes , yes oh , yes , also ? you do n't say . studying , many . well , let 's talk a little more of politics that if not , the call is not going to count yes , no , no , i do n't have is that i 've been doing this already a while that i 've been doing this , and , no you know , they is , first that you do n't understand what , what they are saying that , i already wrote them an email the other day i told them listen at least you should have put a person that speaks spanish so that yes . to say , so that it can be understood clearly , he says no , yes , is that we did n't have and then we are going to look for one , and are going to record it all again and and i said well , that 's good , but let me tell you that you ca n't understand anything some times . yes , exactly , exactly . so , anyway yes , yes , also , there have been many days the same topic so , but well , about the politics i think that , at least this city is is VBG ahead , is very safe the crime has VBN a lot and the city is doing well , but the country yes , same , the country needs a lot of work . this is mayra talking , what is your name ? annie annie yes where do you live ? in miami and you ? in philadelphia ah hmm what was that topic , the truth is that i don´t understand that recording ? neither do i , it was something about politics , i never understand what the topic is no , to me , besides it talks so ugly that i don´t pay too much attention i try to don´t listen to it . the truth how are you ? what do you do ? eh it is me , i was a teacher but right now i have a twenty two months old daughter okay and i have , eh if god VBZ we are going to have another , eh , november the first are you serious ? yes congratulations thank you , ¿and you ? i 'm a college student , i 'm just on my third year ¿what are you studying ? chemical engineering wow uh , here in philadelphia , so yes , i 'm dedicated to that most of the time and ¿where are you from ? i 'm from mexico , from mexico city right i just moved like three years ago just to study , ¿and you ? so , uh , i was born in puerto rico but my fathers came to the united states when i was five years old oh , ok so uh , i 've lived in miami for almost all my life and you go back to puerto rico a lot , do n't you ? oh yeah , you go back to puerto rico often , do n't you ? no , not much because i was born in puerto rico , but my parents are actually dominicans , so oh , ok the whole family is dominican but i'm mm you know , the lady that raised me was puerto rican okay you know , i have like a mix of both okay , how interesting well and and how is the JJ let 's say in mexico , that i 'm not , i do n't know much . how is the JJ in mexico i think that right now is in one of the worst moments , because not long ago , we had always had the same party , the NNP , for like seventy years aha aha and it barely changed with fox i mean the president that we have now . but what has happened , is that everybody had the hope that it was seriously going to be different aha and it has been much worse than before , in other words , he has n't done anything that they used to do before and the little good that the government did before , he does n't do it anymore then we just had a change for worse then the people already don't wow do n't care at all now , they are already JJ aha that they do n't even pay too much attention to the JJ , they are not interested anymore in voting , is already like whoever it is they know that it will be bad , so they do n't care too much . wow mm and here , did you vote here oh oh yes , of course they voted yes , i 'm not really into it right now because i have a small child and i live for her yes , i believe you do so , oh , politics , you know , i , i do n't really know if it 's okay or wrong but what i do like is that at least , oh people can say what they think mhm i know that in my parent 's country , the dominican republic , it was n't always like that , i do n't know if it 's like that now or not , you know , you have had that problem in mexico too , right ? yes but , i was raised in a way in which politics were not VBN for that same reason really ? yes okay so , you know , i speak with my husband but we do n't discuss politics you do n't talk about many i do n't give my opinions about it or anything like that because you know , where they come from , you were n't able to say what you thought about the party in power , it could cause you lots of problems yes , that 's right so , oh yes , they do n't use that in mexico aha i mean it has n't happened as strong as in these countries aha but i do n't know i say , the people in mexico depends , if they 're interested in politics and all that they talk about that aha but what i 've seen is that the majority are a little , well ah , i ca n't hear you too good no , already better , no no still like every other word comes ah , is that my phone does n't have very good NN here but , it 's a little bit better now yes i was saying that in mexico there 's not that much but that not many people talk about that anyways because they worry more about working and just being healthy and all that aha but instead of talking , but i think that is a little more although mexico is kind of conservative in the sense of the moral and the family and how to live and all . mm generally i think they VBP to be a little more liberal mm i mean is not like here , that you see that the NNS have an idea of the economy , well , a different idea of how to do things that , that are totally different aha aha yes they all have similar ideas and there it goes , and then i do n't know perhaps that makes things a little bit harder for me similar but also here it looks a little either you are of one side or you 're from another . yes i stand in the middle and that 's a little complicated because nobody , nobody likes extremes . i mean i could n't choose just one extreme . mm then i do n't know but if you want let 's change topic , we can talk about whatever something you do like to talk about eh , eh , like what ? um , i do n't know what does your husband do , for example eh , he works , for the justice department , he works in a prison . ah , really yes and he that must be hard , and how long have you been married ? is eh thirteen or fourteen years ah , seriously mm wow that 's a lot that 's great , congratulations also thanks , and how do you like the united states ? yes i like it eh , i 've found NNS that i don't like what ? but in general i 'm liking it like eh , the society seems very different for example when i go out to dance and all that mm i do not like dancing here , the NN makes it VB it not fun and easy as in mexico mhm i don´t like VBG out with friends who are not latinos okay they are different from other people who usually do not like what they do but i like to work i like to see how the world works yes you live well , you have opportunities , but i am not used to it yes although the more you work things are not going to get better mhm here the difference is if you want to have more you can actually do it mhm so i just want to be here and make my life here for what ? because it is good to know that there are opportunities there is also a lot of fear in the society by terrorism mhm also having all these international problems do not make me feel comfortable uh huh and besides , i 'm not american , so it 's even harder to me yes to get used to that ¿and how much time do you have left ? to finish ? , i do n't know , it must be like , i hope two years right but maybe i 'll take a little bit more because i want to do a couple NNS to . . and i do n't know , let 's see , ad i do n't know , working , or i also have to wait or if i better go to another country , it all depends , [ it 's not ] just about the money hello , i ca n't , i ca n't hear you again right , no , that , here the ones who have money are below and i think i want to live right hello , hi . hello , hi . eh , who is this ? do n't tell me it 's miguel angel . hello , NNP . how are you ? how great , no ? how nice . i 'm very happy to be able to talk with you . yeah , i recognized your voice , yes . how are you ? you know that i lost your telephone number . i was yes . my god , but yes , i left it here . so so it finally showed up , and wow , ah , yes . and , after i was about to call you , but this week has been crazy . me too , i 've had a lot of work , well , it called me , this fisher machine called me , the one that speaks normally , and and i did n't hear anything they asked . nothing , nothing . and , and i could n't even answer . because , i tell you that i had a week , also , incredible week of work . you know ? yes , right ? so , so you 're studying really hard . hmm . yes because i spent all day in the laboratory . you know ? and how , how did your plans work out , your NN , your theory , your , so , your NNS well , well , at the moment . at the moment it is going well , what happens , is that , of course , it VBZ much work , because everything , eh , are new things , all are NNS , new products nobody has done before . do you know ? then , lets say oh , but how JJ . you go as a NN right ? for the life . man , of course , see it , of the future i know , but , but at work , the present is very good because , because i do what i like most , and , and to me , it is something very interesting . and so . oh boy , well , fantastic , i don´t i don´t i have not done very much , because i live with my dad . do you see it ? he , he is very old . then , i practically am who takes care of him and of course . so that , you have double job , out of home and at home , of course of course , of course , yes , and is your father , is you father , so , is he fine , so , do you take care of him because he is sick ? he has , memory problems . ah , yeah . but , however , he is alone all the , all the , practically . and then , i call him every now and then , and i 'm at least , i 'm an NN , with the people that come tomorrow from NN . they are going to put new windows in all the , in this apartment , and , and everything has been ah , to put windows , yes , yes , yes , because you , you live here in , in philadelphia in the city , or you live outside ? yes , yes , in , in , is a street that 's more to the NN right ? mm , NNP ? six , nine , six , nine , zero , six okay , i 'm not , i 'm not in the same one , but yes . that is like the sun , VBG sun . right ? okay , okay . um , is an apartment , but it has , mm . mm , quite a few years , and i like the NN , because of that , that my dad is calm here , no , aha . sure . well , but , but he can manage on his own , i mean , you do n't have to . sure . sure . and besides the food , is important that he does n't make it , because he has memory problems , you know what happens right ? well , you are a NN , you know . it can cause a fire , of course he does n't do anything himself , it must be because he knows it , right ? sure , he knows he has memory NNS since the doctor talked to him , yes , oh and , how old is your father ? ninety two wow . congratulations , be happy he is still alive thank you , yes . i congratulations , congratulations , how good . aha and then did your mother die old also ? she was seventy nine when she died well , well , no , well , yes , well , but forty eight . he is about ten years older than her i see , i see oh , mm , eh , so , i say that , well , i am thinking of putting him a person , right ? i mean , putting him a sure , sure , maybe a person , or even if it 's for an hour . but , is that he is the one that does n't want to . okay . but . you know what happens ? that the , the people look , i 'm going to tell you a case which is very similar to yours , if if we get disconnected i 'll call you , aha , aha okay , okay , well , look , my grandmother is eighty nine years old . mm . but , but , this past summer , i do n't know if i told you , but she was very JJ and we thought that already it did n't , did n't count it you know ? because , she stopped eating , already okay no , she was VBN . well , well , that she was already going , ah , my god . how old , how old was she , sorry ? that you did n't tell me . eighty nine , she 's eighty nine . and , and well , and like that right ? the thing is that my mom , of course , she could n't be in the house anymore , ah . because , because is that , a person that you already have to VB , that you already have to do everything to , they would get into trouble . aha doing big drama , how good , yes and , now she has taken her to a NN , where she is enjoying oh they treat her like a JJ oh , what a luck and , ah , and she spent the first week crying , where have you put me ? but now she is enjoying it , she does n't want to leave oh , so happy old people , you know what is their problem ? they are very JJ to such things , but afterwards , once they are in , they enjoy it i tell you because i tell you if you think that your father will be better in the company of someone , stop thinking about it and do it . because in the beginning he wo n't like it , and will make some drama i die but then , then , he 'll thank you mhm because being alone all day long , that 's not good . because , being alone , no , it 's much better being with somebody , or somewhere , you know ? well , so far , thanks god , i have been alright in this , and i get JJ sure , sure i even get paid to take care of him . there are a lot of things here ah , look , very good . like some help , a NN , no ? yes , so he can be with me and that . so , ah , how nice . how nice . i say that , so well , while he can . but , in time . that are , JJ citizen NNS , but they 're , sure . they 're places where , ah , he does n't speak english , sure , sure , sure . so , he does n't want to because if he gets lost , because they 'll come to look for him and everything . no ? yeah , yeah . and they take him and they bring him . but , so , but the NN does n't speak spanish , the NN , so he says , and if i don't yes , really ? listen , and there is n't something , there is n't something , there is n't one of these day NNS that speak spanish ? there is n't ? for the spanish speaking community . there in the center . there are places that speak spanish , the inside ones . sure , because i think there has to be , eh , there has to be . okay , is what i was thinking of doing next , being with him , there a while with that , mm . sure . and , then , well , and that the people see , and that he talks that the people see you , you stay with him a while , and like that , at the end , he will ask you for it . at the end , he will be the one who will tell you , NNP , oh , yes , then , my mom , eh , also got me a little because when they got here , i would say , she would tell him , josefina is going to put is in a in a home , here they call it a home . a NN home . i would tell her , but mom , why do you tell me that ? . ah ? no , that is that , a company , excuse me , they are asking me something . no , god , no . she has him RB well , they were both like that with that fear . and , me no , ah , i say , how that you are going but , that , of doing it , would be a JJ thing that , that he would love . right ? ah . okay , okay he tell me , that , i 'm a NN for you , that i do n't know ah , my god , is a drama . ah , the JJ people , really , eh . that , that , become like small children . right ? yes , i do n't want to VB him either . mm . they become very dependent . they become yes , i mean , they are very old , but they become like babies . ah , is a , is a , is a NN , yes , yes . my grandmother , the same . my mom went on vacation this summer , and well , and you 're leaving , you 're leaving me alone , what value does that have , i mean that , my mom had been without a vacation , two years already . you know ? aha . oh , can you imagine ? your mom is young ? my mom no . my mom is already , well , she turned seventy this year . and , you have older siblings ? yes , yes . i have my brother who lives here in new york , ah , yes . the one from new york , aha . ah , you are the youngest ? well , the youngest , that i 'm already thirty years old also , but ah , thirty . but yes . but , i 'm always the JJS , sure . it does n't look like it yes i , do consider myself young . but , then i see the , the NNS here in the university , i say , goodness , no way , how young . and , i eighteen years again . oh , yes . and i remember when i was eighteen years old , and started the university . yes . and when do you have vacations ? me never . here , never . there are no vacations , no . but , maybe in christmas a few day . you know ? in , in summer a week . but , well . RB i do n't have vacations . you know ? that is what . ah , my boss is NNP , but in , in NNP NNP , imagine now , right ? and you told me that the , the NNP is not so , ¿how 's that ? , like the masters where you have to study a lot , but yes , the NNP is more about doing your own research it 's something else i mean , it 's more , a more JJ process , ¿right ? uh huh , yeah , and doing the , a NN , ¿right ? , it 's a study more , sure , the NN , the NN oh , and ¿is it just you or are you doing it with someone else ? i 'm doing it , i mean , it 's my own , i have my own project , but well , i 'm here . i work with other people VBG , ¿you know ? , but my , my project is mine . i mean , no , no one else is doing it . i mean , it 's an original research ¿and on what year will you finish it ? well , look , i 'm on second year , so it 's up to , it 's five years to finish , but , well , i still have four left oh i just started my second year , yes oh boy , ¿and do you go out as a doctor after that ? sure , well , i hope so , if not , they 'll VB my ass i do n't think so , i think you 'll make it no , i do n't think so either , but well , you never know oh , i was gon na ask you your e mail yes and i was going to give you mine okay , because , sometimes i 'm on the computer , and say , ah , if i had , i 'll give you mine , write it down . aha . let 's see if , if we have enough time here . what is it ? look , is is NNP , NNP of , NNP of cow ? no , NNP of NN . um e good evening , i 'm joe hello , this is NNP i had the feeling that they were going to put us together again . yes how is how was your day , how did it go ? good , well , it , it 's friday , and we are eating NN in my NN , parents house ah , that 's JJ yes . and you ? is it pretty down there ? yes , yes , the weather , today was very , very , very good . and here it was warm NNS VBP . and well , i 'm alone , but , also , i went out to eat , so , i 'm very happy . the i was watching television right now , to see what 's going on . yes well , what else , we 'll talk about politics , ah ? yes , well , what else can we talk about ? NNP ? ay , i do n't know , let 's see , ah well i know that , well , they show in television of , something about , political changes , um . i know what they are doing , there is a republican guy that made JJ comments about black race . so , has been VBN a lot . he is , i think he has a radio show . o i think that the , the president said something about that he did n't want , so , the white house was not involved in his comments , or something like that hmm . those who are going to have kids , that they VBP them , and then crime will be VBN . pretty stupid NN . well yes , this is like , but was it last night we talked ? yes . no , really it 's that they have so much NN , that in reality , they 're really relaxed in the ways that they manage their issues . like , that they do n't catch with , yes , yes . well , it 's something that i VBP a lot . at the same time they were talking in the news about all the people who died in iraq this week . yes , yes like , this issue of the war keeps being a really sad issue , and how they say in english , uh , well , for president , because in reality they 're VBG him continue to do this . well , so the yes . i think , i think that they should put NN , like a , a , one of the rules that must change is the as in the past there was a lot of NN y a lot of politicians knew that the companies were VBG out NNS still do it but not at a great NN as before , that they VBD of the JJ products , the eh yes waste like they say in english , they throw it out in areas that could affect the community yes in fact here in colorado there are several areas that NN , well , well , well they VBP the water , that 's because , of the things they VBD that they was a lot , even NN too . and now i was talking with my girl also . are you with your mom today ? yes NNPS and NNP , and half of the sundays yes , all of the week ? more or less , no , half of the week . thursday , thursday to i mean , do you have the same schedule every week ? thursday to . . friday ? oh that 's cool yes , yes and mine stays with me on NNP , NNP and sometimes from friday to saturday or from saturday to sunday that 's fine i mean , but it 's always three times a week oh , that 's fine yes , i enjoy a lot the company of my little daughter . do you have only one , NNP ? yes , just one yes . how old is she ? five years ? oh , oh yes , just like mine , right . but you are younger than me , are n't you VB ? how old are you ? i am twenty six , twenty seven years old twenty seven . i am twenty years older than you . i am forty . seven . i had my daughter when i was already old . but my girl NNS me with energy . she is my NN , actually we get along well in the sense of be being like parents right . we do n't get along as NNS but we get along well like , like parents of the girl . we work well together . yes oh , mm . at least ha because even though she would like , it 's true that she would like to see us both together again , yes . because that would affect her a lot . i have seen that a lot in other , ah , yes . yes , that specially in houses yes but and they are well JJ . yes . yes , yes . yes , it 's like they have a , a , sixth sense at , at times . or at least in front of her , so that it does not affect her . because we are very JJ as well that if , say , we have some NN , we begin to discuss that in front of her , well , it will affect yes . yes . that this , this always affects me a great deal . you know all the expenses that one discriminate no , a little , i suppose , yes , they discriminate a lot against men . and it 's true that there 's a bunch of NNS ah by there , but the laws discriminate a lot against the men . i mean , instead of like that like me , yes . but , nothing . and yes i enjoy that a lot , i would love to have her every day . yes , yes , yes . and and since the girl is growing up eh . do you and your FW wife get along well ? yes . yes for us too yes , yes , already , already we yes we understand us better and and , ah , well , our first thing is to take care of her , our of course , of course . have you married again NNP ? what ? did you married again , or ? who ? you , you . after the divorce , did you found someone ? um , no , she goes out with some , sometimes she has boyfriends , but never have been like that . oh . well i , i , i do have a girlfriend we have been together for five months right now . oh yes ? and , i like her a lot , and how good . we get along very well right now . how nice . that is good . ah . yes , it is very difficult . ¿yes ? but this , i mean , with the one i 'm with now yes uh , also has a daughter that 's six years old and also , kinda , the same thing happened , ¿right ? yes so , it 's like , we understand each other very well in that aspect , right ? that 's good of , of how things are and ¿do you know her ? , yes and , i think , yes , yes , she 's very cool and that 's good , that 's good , when you find someone good like that and that you get along fine , and love each other very much , that 's very important yes , and it 's also , uh , she 's also a good mom , luckily that too , even more important because , uh , i see , i see , i see how she VBZ her daughter , and she VBZ her very good she VBZ her baby well , the yes , yes , very well that 's good good evening , from new york . hello , eh , from new york too . ah , which part of new york ? eh , manhattan . oh , how good . are you spanish , right ? yes , are you john ? yes , we talked last night . oh . yes , eh , we talked yesterday and , we have to talk of the same thing yes , i know , then , now i think that i know what are we going to do . NNP . i don´t know what , no , i don´t know so and what , how are you doing today ? a very beautiful day , right ? ah , eh , i have not go out from house yet oh , right ? ah , were you out until late last night ? no . no ? no , but i had to work , well to study and i have not gone out oh , yes ? oh , and what do you work in ? study . ah , ah , you are studying . yes , well that 's what you had told me in colombia right ? uh um yes . ah , wow . wow . well , then , how do we talk about the topic today ? because the truth is that is going to be hard i already think that yesterday we covered it what already had to be said . almost everything well , yes , well i have a question , you tell me . think there should be more parties ? would you like it if there were other parties ? um , well , yes , it would n't be a bad idea eh , have one but there have been parties the only thing that just that the parties eh , the other parties there have been , have no strength at all yes . but there are other parties , there 's the liberal party , there 's well eh , other small parties . yes , but , uh , do you like the other parties , better , , than the bigger ones ? no the truth is that the JJ is so is so hard , right ? um . that , well at least the possibility of VBG one or another that has ideas , eh , eh , obviously is better than having a NNP , oh , yes . a NN right ? that is what he says and there 's no opinion at all i mean , but like we were talking yesterday , the , the parties are more or less the same , they have similar ideas one want to cut a little more , others want to cut a little less and and well , so yes , the good thing that the democracy has perhaps is that if something really is bad for , eh , ah , ah , uh , the people , they really do n't like it uhum . always ways from , to avoid it , it 's really bad . with a NN you ca n't , a NN uhum . exactly . yes . yes , yes , yes , for example , the mayor here , he did something that i really did n't like because and you know , you have your freedom and you can live your life as you want but he took away the freedom of the people because they ca n't smoke in the restaurants . and i do n't smoke , no ? no . but , i think that they do have a separate area in which the ones that like to smoke , they can do it , i think that obviously , i do n't like it when they are in the other table and you are and i oh , i just started eating and it is over and they are smoking and they are VBG the smoke , the smoke right at your face . when i 'm eating , you know ? but , yes , in general , if they choose a place in the restaurant and they go , this part you can smoke but well then , smoke , and the bars too , there 's a bar in which , everyone is smoking so i had to the smoke bothers you , well you go since there are so many bars in , in new york , well if you do n't like NNP . sure but what happens is that you 're if your friends smoke , then yes , well also . but i think that , if i choose this it because i want people to RB stop smoking , because it 's bad for their health . well yes , but it 's bad for the , the , the health , i agree but so , eh , if we 're going to start there , how many other things are bad for the health , so are we going to start to to take them from people all the NNS that there are in the world that are bad for you ? drinking is also bad for you , if you drink in NN , no ? yes . so what , what 's the next thing to do ? not let people drink . no , sure , there are some , from this place there are many things in the you know . life that are bad and you ca n't VB everything . but the same with the drugs that are very bad . they 're VBN yes . yes . is not like the alcohol . the alcohol if you drink it in NN well it does very little harm . the cigarette even if you take it in NN is bad . but if this will VB that the people each time smoke less and that the young people do n't smoke who they are always is when the people start , when they are young and do n't have the NN still well well , yes formed , they start to smoke and then they ca n't they ca n't quit smoking . i do n't find it so bad . um . who is young also , she 's twenty four years old has never VBN either , and does n't drink either , she does n't like alcohol . uh huh . do n't call attention , do n't have enough personality to say i do n't need to smoke yes , yes . uh huh . in spain , people smoke so much i know . no , in spain , i know that sometimes you do n't smoke , and you 've VBN like , as if you were VBN to VB . and this seemed really bad to me . was incredible how , how they smoke in spain , and how they smoke in europe . no ? eh , so but , eh , anyway eh , i , i think that they should , also should have their decision of where , where they can smoke , that there should be their restaurants or there should be bars where they say , well okay , in these bars you can smoke , right ? or they have a space to smoke . um , because they also have rights too , if , if they want to die , well but one dies in they way that one wants . whether , whether is drinking or whether is okay . but the bad thing is that it affects the rest , is that is not just him but also the that 's the problem . sure . right ? but , i think that 's already a little too much because but the people that smoke complain too much , because i ah , i do n't know how long you 've been here but the people , i see , ah that they accept it quite well , you always see in the bars even in the winter , the people smoking outside yes , aha . and it does n't seem to bother them too much , it does n't seem like it yes , yes but like , i do n't know yes , but like you , like i told you is one of those things of , of the politics that i think has already crossed the line , right ? yes . that , at least in finding a way to VB them , eh in , in , in some way . which , which is what we had before that um . but anyway , and , i do n't know , do n't you ever think of VBG your own party when you see the politicians doing it all so bad ? oh , eh , look , eh , ah , i do n't like it specially in this country , eh , m i never VBD with politics because , eh , the press , the press i really do n't like here because they can't hold back um and they start VBG all the dirty NN because they think that they are acting with interest who were you sleeping with before ? what did you smoke , did n't smoke yes . and well , that honestly that to me , if i become a NN i want them to judge me for what i do in the politics , and not for your private life , right ? no ? exactly , for , for my ability to carry the country or carry the state eh , my experience sure . but not what i do in , in , in my private life , that for me but you do n't think that perhaps is not so much i do n't know the media , but rather the others , the NN and the other parties who are interested in getting that out both , because the press here also eh , has divided in , in a press of , of democrats and of republican press . uh um . so fox for example is , they VBP to the right and the new york times , VBZ to the left . right ? then you are reading eh , from the point of view of , of the left or the right . and , the press should be , um , must be JJ . right ? report the events how they are not from a , from a political point of view , of the left or the right and they do n't , and is not what they do . the new york times , channel twelve , NNP are , they VBP a lot to the left right ? eh , they VBD that guy , NNP rather who was the most important for many years who was in NNP like in , in , in the RB news they VBD him because they tried to get out eh , before , a few weeks before bush 's election they tried to come out with a report that was VBN , eh hi good afternoon , NNP from connecticut hi , good afternoon , i 'm miguel angel , ¿what 's your name , what did you say your name was NNP oh , NNP , right i live in connecticut in connecticut , oh , very well , my name is miguel angel , i 'm here in philadelphia right , ok yes , ¿how 's everything there , good ? good , very good . we have a great day , sunny , and a little hot too , uh huh oh , it 's cold here yes , it 's , sure , you 're further north . very well , where , ¿where are you from , where are you from , NNP ? it 's starting to . . . puerto rican right , oh , yeah , that 's good , ¿how many years have you been there ? yes , yes , well , just a year . uh huh , just one year , i 'm studying here , so , i 'm doing a doctorate , ¿you know ? VB what ? you are going to earn good money . ah , we will see . you never know . and what do you do ? and , do you participate into politics ? i am , i am not working now , but i work in a bank . are you , are you sick leave , are you sick , or have you had a child , or ? no , i am VBG , VBG , no , look , my , my boyfriend is earning good money , so i don´t need to work now . so oh , how good , how good . how lucky , hear . some of you have luck , eh . there are some with luck . that is good , very good . how long have you been in the united states ? so my brother lives in new york . oh . and , he has been , well , yes , like fifteen , fifteen , fourteen or fifteen years , too . so , yes , he has been here for a long time , and that is what made me decide to come . do you know ? ah , and do you vote ? are you a NN , or not ? but , i can ' vote , no , no . i do n't have , oh , that you are , this , no , i have a visa of , NN . student . right ? i have a a NNP one a NNP one , sure . i ca n't , i ca n't vote , no . it also would n't interest me to vote , because , honestly , how things are , so , you can . well , but , i do n't find that he 's done a bad job . what happens is that , in many things , you know , each , each , how do you say it ? each leader that is VBN , if he does n't , if he does n't work with all from his party , things do n't come out too good . understand ? and , there are more , i think that there are more republicans in , in the yes . i do n't know if in the NN or the NN . and , well , the laws , is not the same , understand , that when all the democrats are in power , yes . when you choose a leader who is working with groups that are not of their same party , is very hard . very hard , for you to be able to make decisions , mm . okay , i mean , do yo say it because of the NN ? so but , now , there , the majority is republican . right ? or not ? aha . i do n't know , i do n't know . i ask . now there 's a republican majority . and , you say that they take longer in JJ passing the laws , in VBG the laws . okay . eh , if it was the democratic party , well , then , they agree , understand ? no let 's work , or let 's find a way , and why , and why do you think , why do you think that is , why do you think that the democrats agree more than the republicans well , because is all , is all , is as if the republicans were in power , if the republicans are in power , and all the NN is republican , okay . yeah , yeah . but , if you have from other parties , you will always fine , eh , an NN , you know ? it 's , NN , it 's not , it 's not only one thing . it 's like when you 're studying or working , you 're in a job , hmm . and someone comes who NNS after you , hmm . who might have , well , a grade , higher , more education than you , RB , does n't know how to do the job like you because you 've been there for many years . exactly , aha , you already have the experience , you 've spent more time there . but , this guy who came in new , only because he has a bigger title , they will give him a higher position than you , they will go above you , you know ? hmm . yeah , yeah , yeah . for me , you know ? i 'm i 'm a NN . and , at the beginning i did n't vote because , but i realized that hispanics need to count . you know ? it does n't matter where we 're from , yes , of course , sure . sure . exactly , you have to contribute , some NN you will contribute . and , if we do n't get into the politics , they will never listen to us . understand ? no , of course , that , that is , that is super clear . yes , no , in spain i , i in okay , in spain i , have always voted , i think , i , since , well , since i was able to vote at eighteen years old . aha . aha , i think that never , i 've never , i 've never VBN . okay , okay . mm , mm understand ? then , later already , when i arrived here to the united states , well , as soon as i got here , i register to vote fast . sure . and now you can , sure . we are the biggest power , now , in all this nation . because , here , without the hispanic for the jobs , hmm , hmm . they 're not left with anyone , you know ? yeah , yeah . and do you think that , that the republicans better defend the interests of the hispanics than the democrats ? it depends on who has power , it depend on what roots they have . you know ? sure , aha , aha . because , believe me , all , the people , do n't support bush . but i think that bush has given , bush and NNP , for me , they 've been two , and the other , NNP , aha . yes , and they 're from different parties , sure . hmm . sure . in the bush family there are hispanic people . well , yes , i think it 's , it 's the brother in law or the sister in law are from mexico , or something like that yes . yes , yes , yes , yes . mhm , aha and , there were a lot of hispanic working , in good NNS , you know what i mean ? mhm , mhm NNP NNS , office NNS , there were many people yes , yes . there are , now there are a lot of hispanic in the responsibility places of the government , yes that 's why i tell you , because he , he has mixed with the hispanic people . you know what i mean ? there are other NNS who have not given any NNS , not to black people i see nor the hispanic the blacks , that sound funny yes , yes . yes , the JJ people yes , the NNP , NNP , how do they call them ? mm JJ american NNP american , right yes , yes , yes , yes NNP , now , the , now the NNP american have , have had more NNS than they had before right . look at NNP NNP , all what he has done and they have been , aha , it has only been , i think , it has all been with these three NNS yes , yes , yes . well , it has been some years , if you add , if you add all the NNS of these NNS , it has been some years because , NNP was eight , right ? aha , aha and then there was NNP , eight also , that makes sixteen . and this one will soon make eight also . so , it is twenty some years and , why do you think they did n't change bush ? why do you think that even the democrats voted for bush ? well , i do n't know , really i do n't know , because i have been in this country for one year , and i do n't have no idea because of the war but , i think that , i think that it was only because of the war . otherwise they have VBN him NNP , eh ? that i think that because of the war they should n't have VBN VBN him . the problem is you know what i mean ? if they had put another person i see , i see , already let 's suppose that things turn out wrong , who will be responsible for it ? mh to this new person who entered . sure . you know ? he has to finish what he started . because , if you notice how , how he was going to win , if the majority voted , the other times it was , you know ? it was the republican , and he did n't win . yeah . or , what we have to see is if he VBZ it or does n't finish it . yeah . yeah , yeah . but , these things , aha . like , even if , they do n't want to show up . even if people wanted to vote for him , i do n't VB no . twenty eight years in power . no , no . here in the states , no , no , no . here in the united states , no . in the united states you ca n't have more than two terms . like , NNP could n't run anymore , and NNP could n't run anymore . maybe i think that they can come back , because they can come back , i think that , how do you say ? to what can happen is that another party 's candidate would VB okay bush can not be more in power and has to go , so now another republican candidate can cover . now we have bush NNP . in office but he can no longer be there . you know ? i think as soon as his term NNS there would be another candidate mm . the NN must have the power , and they can do whatever they want do yes , that´s right . i will throw a bomb there too , and it would be over . i would do as in NNP . because these people are bad . no is that they are by their own belief . understand ? no , but this , this , this town , i think that they are all fanatics . because , if you look there , and you do n't see a woman in the street . when they show them , you do n't see a single woman in the street . because , there , the woman is not worth anything . well , in all in all the hispanic areas , there 's NN anywhere . sure , there 's also a lot of NN in the hispanic world . you know ? hello hello yes my name is annie and i 'm calling from miami how are you ? fine and your name ? ah , junior , junior NNP NNP junior junior yes ah , pardon okay and where are you calling from ? from new york ah , how nice and what is your name ? my name is annie aha a pleasure a pleasure too how old are you ? eh , eh , thirty six i am twenty two wow are you a student ? no . i finished school ah how good and you ? eh , i am here at home with my daughter waiting for another one waiting what waiting another baby , too so another one , and how old is your daughter ? yes eh , twenty two months oh , i have i have a two years old one . oh , what is her name ? ah , oh and yours her name is NNP NNP thanks what is your nationality ? eh , i was born in puerto rico but , eh we moved here to miami when i was five aha my parents are dominicans , but the lady that raise me was puerto rican so i 'm like a mix of both um so when they ask me i never know exactly how you were born where ? oh , you 're puerto rican yes dominican puerto rican and and both yes and and you ? aha puerto rican ah how nice what part in puerto rico ? you do n't remember ah what part in puerto rico ? eh , in NNP it was where we lived for many years well until i was five oh and you ? i 'm from NN on my dad 's side and from NNP on my mom 's side aha but i 've never gone there oh yes yes wow never , and have you returned there ? yes no , it 's been like let me see probably like six years that i do n't go , but before that i went every summer , i would spend the NNS in santo domingo no then eh from there we always would go to puerto rico and from puerto rico you know we would return and are you married ? yes yes , from with a puerto rican or dominican ? no , with an american or american . yes he 's in the army the , ah he 's in the army no , no he is , he works with the department of justice oh so , but doing what ? he , he eh is NN of NNS oh of NN , okay no because almost all the women that talk in the survey are married with an american today are in the service . no i , i also work in the police too oh yes yeah , with NNP wow yeah and how 's that , that must be a tough job uh , it 's good , and it 's fun if you do it when you 're young right because doing , like that , young , since i 'm more than twenty two , i work in the street , regular clothes and all that right as a JJ NN and that right and i like it more than when i first started last year as a NN , i was dressed in JJ but i have more fun now and , your work schedule , ¿is it good or is it a little tough ? it depends , because as a JJ it can change right one week i might be here in an area , doing a , an hour , a different schedule , like that , it depends . i wanted to do that , uh , JJ uh huh what you do , your husband , i do n't know , i wanted to be that , but uh huh i liked being on the streets better yes he , he 's not exactly a JJ NN her is more for NN yeah . he is , he , he right . that 's what he likes to do , the NN but he 's working with the department of i do n't understand the word in spanish . NN oh right . um then he , he you know , he is not necessarily a NN but rather he he is the one that VBZ , with VBG the NNS VBD yeah so that they do n't have you know fights and that , yeah time to do any other thing yes i wanted , i was interested in doing that aha but then like , i have many friends in that . aha talking with them they say is good , because you are inside there always in the jail and that but the only thing is that after a while you feel as if you are also VBN well because you are VBN up also there with them inside there , well that the only thing different is that you can home at night . yes , the good thing about him is that he 's not inside one of those JJ NNS , he is outside his is the one that , gives them the NNS yeah , you know the music , whatever , so he is not you know in the NNS and he has a NN there when he 's working or when he goes out . no , no , no , no , nor when he goes out neither . oh , he does n't have a NN , when he goes out . no , with the department of justice yes or federal NN of NNS yes they do n't give them a NN when they are inside because they think okay no , here neither but when they leave work . neither , that 's the only department that does n't give them eh , a NN here , here there are a few that have . look unless it is since we are in new york aha that , because , according to them the only reason they give them the NN is because if someone who has been VBN sees you in the street that VBZ you he can hurt you wow that 's why here they give the guns to the NN VBZ no he , he has he , he can carry it if he wants , well not if he wants , is that yes the institution where he works has n't given it to him oh and many of the people at , at work want the guns , but he does n't want it because he does n't want to be you know , VBG a gun all the time yes especially since we have , you know a small girl but , that is something that the people where he works at are trying to you know , to , to request but he , every year he has to go to what do they call it to what is it called , i even forgot the english eh , a VBG man yeah , yeah , then he has to not only do it to let 's say , to where he works but he also has eh , a a ah , ah , ah , i 'm VBG the words he has a special training yes that to be able eh , to take the NNS , let 's say from the jail to the hospital . oh transport right then that 's why he also has to do the NN VBG yes well here all the JJ NNS they simply give it to them , because you know that in a JJ NN that they do something , happens inside they give them that . yes sometimes , when they go out to the street , you know what they say , the world is a small place . and they can run into them , many times we have have heard on the police VBD that there are JJ NNS that are VBG them on the street wow and the police has to go to help them wow they VBP a ten thirteen or JJ NN getting [ hit ] and they say the code they 're giving about it well , thank god here where he 's working , there are NNS , but not violent , and he says the reason for that is that many of the people who go to prison here in miami yes do n't want to leave miami yeah so many times they behave , because you know , if they do n't , they send them to other places , let 's say new york , NNP , whatever yes , it 's like every month , like , you ca n't judge the person because there are lots of people that have gone to prison but it 's for things yes that they did n't do yes or things that you know you make mistakes , that it 's a mistake , but it 's something illegal right because look , just because they VBD , and it 's not them right but they have to take both people to hear both sides VBP the story , and you 're VBG the record of a person no matter how innocent it is , they did n't do it , but you have to VB them both for the simple reason is that right now if i go out with five guys in the street and i fall above a man it 's good , you will say there were three of these guys are NNS , i gave it to this man but , they will VB me , they wo n't VB him , when they ask me , why did you fall on this man ? oh , because he abused someone who i used to see . yes and they have to find out because you said this . yes because this happened here , there was a man who fell on , the let the man go , and the boys were trying , you know how the police were , oh , VBD up you VBP , right hmm and because he went , because the man had seen a NN in the area , and the boys saw him and they sent him to check it out wow and they let the man go , but after ten , fifteen minutes they caught the man . they VBD on the guys because , it 's like i say , many people will VB . yeah so it makes it a bit difficult but at least he has a job . well it 's like my , and you do n't work ? no , i stay here at home with the kid oh , you see , the mom of my daughter works too , she 's a NN in a clinic aha well she works five , no , five days a week , right a week , then the other week she works seven days . wow and i work five days well this is why i was asking you about the schedule , because his schedule is n't , you know , it 's not difficult , but right now he 's coming home and we still have n't VBN dinner . hmm and this is n't bad , because at least he 's not working from ten to six yeah you know no , like you say , today i do n't work , or tomorrow aha sunday , monday i work , but next week i have to work friday and saturday and sunday because it 's for the clubs , the night clubs aha i have to go to the night clubs to dance and something like that that , not , yes , i think that the two parties are okay , but i sometimes think that we could have more than two parties because there are lots of different things that those two parties do n't touch IN and the problem with that is that the country could become even more divided so , to have more parties you need to have a government style that is more , like , what do i know , more like , what 's the name , the ones that those countries have that all the parties get together and instead of being VBN , they form a majority and and they try to achieve a common NN between two or three different parties so that they are stronger , like in the NNP . the two parties are different , they are not the same . that 's the way i see it or in the NNS , sure , the NNS would loose money , maybe , but maybe if they all get a certain amount of money , that is the same from both parties , then they would n't have to buy or sell them to the politicians , through people or companies that have lots of money so that they are sure that they will be RB VBN . i think that 's the way it should be , but oh , oh we are in it now , in it now , no ? it 's been hard to pass laws that change the NN rules . it's mm , i think i am not very aware about what is going on , about mexican politics , but it seems to me that maybe what 's going on there and some other countries . where there is a party with all that strength , mm , they do whatever they want , and if you do n't do what they want then because we are very divided , very divided . and all the power is VBN by one party now . this party has the , eh , judges , the NNP , the NNP all the power . but , once you have three or four , why not five , why not ten , why not twenty ? so this is a balance excuse me , you , you , where are you from ? i am argentinean and how is it in argentina ? in argentina , there are several parties . but there are several parties which are all of the NNS ' . they have different names but they are all NNS ' , and then there is the NNP party and then there are other parties , but they are all very small ones . but , since NNP , the party who VBZ the power is the NN ' country , or whatever name it has go on NNS , they block them somehow , so they ca n't go on , and finally the president has to VB , and have new elections yes . like we say , VBP the NN to the JJ mhm now , the present president , he is of a NNP party . but , mm , it seems to me that he is doing good things follow his policy , yes . this is what it seems to me . and where are you from ? hmm no , no , the truth is that i know less than a little , but , how are the parties there ? well , it 's , during many years it was actually VBN by only one party . the `` NNP '' party hmm in fact fox , is the first president who does n't belong to the party in power oh eh , he 's from the `` NNP '' and the `` NNP . `` the NNP NNP party has been the one that VBD during all those years . a little in , in argentina , with the NNP , no ? yes , hmm this , yes , fox , eh , has also been putting many blocks on a JJ level , the NNPS . at the time that this passed the NNS in exchange . that is always a means of balance . balance when , when there are two or eh or very established NNS like it is here right ? yes . the same happens that in the JJ NNP well that just right ? all the NNS of the president are not voted and , it VBZ ? a little there . well the actions of one party , right ? but is true that in mexico there are many parties . but well , is eh the government gives them money for their NNS , and is a NN of money in reality . almost , almost that there what , you know that each NNP NN , the parties are formed ah , to get the money of to get the money and yes , they did n't get enough votes to continue , for the following period , simply well the following the following round they change the name and form another party again ah . there there 's a terrible corruption , right ? mm but , but well the three important parties that have always been VBG so to speak are , the NNP party , NNP mm party of the democratic NNP , that now has an important candidate , in which the mexicans are putting their NNS on . and it would be a very different NN yes . and well so , being in a city of twenty six million people is like a country . is like a country . and since he 's really done important things . he 's very at the head of all the eh these opinion NNS , right ? yes . the because it turns out that my parents are six months here and six months there . then when they are here i have to eh , i put in have been here , since seventy four . i 'm fifty years old . aha , and are you working here ? eh , yes , since the , since i was nine years old that , that i live in the united states . ah , wow . no , well all your life then , however in the spanish NNP mm one finds out about other countries , and find out much more of mexico of course because is here next to us and of other things , then sometimes when i hear hear news from mexico i do n't understand too well what is happening , but now what you VBD to me will help me . yes , yes , yes of course , yes it helps . and really , this NNP NNP calls a lot , a lot of people , he 's been helping . people of JJ resources . well that has mean , almost , almost the difference between life and death for these people . right ? hi , what 's your name ? mayra , who am i talking to ? eh pilar pilar , where are you ? what ? where are you ? in new york , and you ? ah ok , it 's philadelphia , you 're close by mhm philadelphia mh , and what do you think about , about politics ? i do n't know about politics it seems to me that it 's very different here in the united states of here in mexico but for what i 've been i do n't know seeing people and all i do n't like it here , that you must be by force on one side you have to be either republican or NNP yes you think and people yes , i think , well it seems that they 're too JJ in their decisions they make like that i mean always they 're either democrats or republicans and that 's it like that VBZ or NNS and that 's it yeah well there are more parties but they have very little yes , yes it seems that they have very little right yes , that 's the bad thing and what do you think ? what 's your opinion ? of the well i 'm the same , i come from spain and i do n't know much about politics here and i do n't i mean i 'm not very informed , but i do n't like it for whatever little i know i do n't like the government they have right now mhm the united states mhm and i do n't know if the other party was going to be better , it seems to me that they are kind of the same i believe they are pretty similar regarding economy and economic issues yes , there are not lots i mean , they have to be similar , i mean , there 's no other way yes , it 's just that women 's rights and yes , i believe so , i think that 's where the main difference is yes but i think one is pretty conservative and then they decide all this and the other is more liberal and about VBG NN rights , decisions and the other one is a bit conservative , the other one is just a bit conservative . mhm , that 's the bad thing , i mean , it 's just , or at least to me , t he people i 've spoken to , we are worried as everything is becoming so conservative . and they are VBG key persons for the government that are so conservative and with a similar NN for the government mm but they wo n't last that long , this is going to last until bush leaves because for example , well that are to be used in the united states , i do n't think it will change in a long time , i do n't know if that 's a good thing , to me , it 's a JJ step too that they are doing that yes , yes , do n't you think that people here does n't vote , oh , by a party ? they vote as a tradition or for the specific candidate that wants to be president i do n't know , it 's about the parties spending , they spend so much money in the NNS because people , that 's what they vote for . yes , yes that seems a lot like them , well is what i saw many people did n't even know what it was what it was they were offering or VBG and all but rather it was like VBG yes this one is christian , we are all christians , that 's good hm and already i mean it seemed , so i do n't know how good the NNS they both presented in the NNS were yes , yes i mean it surprised me a lot the result of the vote i never thought it would 've turned out like that but i do n't know well here by the east coast the people didn't yes , no did n't , did n't believe what came out in the result , no is that it ca n't be yes , no well i think that around the world , no i imagine in , in other countries , what they must 've thought , someone told me for example in japan when they found out they came out with a video in the news that everybody was laughing they thought that it was funny that they seriously voted for him incredible it was like that so ridiculous , so JJ that they just laughed for me i felt i like crying , i felt like i got very mad i felt like crying more than laughing yes no yes i got very mad but i think that they were seeing like that how JJ everything could be yes yes , yes it really VBZ me sometimes that such things happen yes but is that the government , does n't have a good NN unfortunately , they know how to say what to say to convince the majority in this country the people that do n't have much much education or many ideas , so that they believe everything they say well yes , hmm and they get their votes and then they do what they want because they do n't do what they say either , they do what they feel like and a little more hmm it 's really sad , truly , but well , in this country it 's like this but not as extreme , but it 's not the same , i 'm from mexico , for example and this , really is a NN that only but there 's a little tries to sell an imagine or do what they can and yeah , and after yes and then when you come to power and do what you want , no hmm yes it 's the same in spain it 's the same in spain there are two parties to , well , i think it 's like this everywhere , those who are the most powerful yes and when one of them is in power , the other , the NN VBZ themselves to VBG everything the other parties does , the same , it 's all bad yes hmm and when it 's their turn it 's the other party who VBZ , everything is bad and then the dedicate those in the government try to change and VB everything that the others have done , they VBP it yes , to VBG it and then they start again , yes yes , and the country does n't progress much hmm and what are the two , what are they two parties called eh , they 're called the popular party which is the more conservative hmm the workers socialist spanish party is the most liberal one but the other too are kind of liberal too okay , okay oh , the truth is , they are kind of in the center but the problem is that , or at least it seems like the socialist party just wants to vote against everything . yes yes , well the popular party has now lost the last elections because of the NNS in madrid , do you remember ? i do n't know if you know about it but do you remember that there were some JJ NNS in madrid last year ? mm , in mexico , in mexico is also like that , i 'm from there and we have two or three in march parties that are quite similar mhm but the they are not divided in NNS or liberal because nobody is really that liberal anyway i see i mean , i do n't know everything about women rights but they are not even VBN in mexico , so , i believe that the only difference is that yes i do n't know , they said that their first NN was , i do n't know mhm the economy really but they are all so similar , i think that the only reason why they voted for the other party is because we were tired of the old one . and people wanted a change yes so , they voted but it was for the worse and now they do n't know what to do because you have to go back to what it used to be or stay with the one that never did anything yes that 's right , that same thing happened in madrid yes the socialist party was in the government for twelve years , and at the end they voted for the other party because they were doing it bad and people was tired of them , and changed , right ? mhm the other party stayed for eight years but had also his problems and there was another change , but , none of them are good , people do n't like any of them well , yes , yes , i think that 's how we are here too there comes a point when you realize that both of them are RB bad , that all the politicians lie a lot , that everything you never , you can never trust what they say , it 's sad . it 's quite sad mhm it 's very sad after all yes , yes , that 's what i have seen , not long ago there were elections and i was not here , i mean , i arrived the next day and i did n't even notice , so people has so little interest that nobody , not JJ family nor my friends , told em there was going to be an election mhm , but they voted , did n't they ? in the city , yes , no , in mexico in general , i think they vote quite a lot , i mean , the rate is much higher than here in the united states , i think so , i 'm not sure but this time it was RB low , yes , nobody was interested people , you see , do n't know who to vote for yes , yes , there is nobody worth voting for i think so , i do n't know if i 'm right but i think that young people is not as interested in politics as they were before , i mean our parents ' generation mhm politics was very important then , the age of the NNS and well yes i think so , is that and now however the young people do n't care mm now that yes is not time of money or of working in banks and all the rest i think yes the people do n't have any reason to get into politics , right mm , yes that i do n't know either . and what do you do ? what ? what do you do study , i 'm studying , and you ? okay also the same , i 'm in the third year of the university now mm and what are you studying i study chemical engineering ah really me , me JJ yes really ah seriously , okay yes and the ones that live there in the university of new york some did vote because many of my friends did n't vote here either no is that me my friends here are all spaniards ah okay then no , no we ca n't vote but well yes i knew an american that was in my class and we did a project together and he did vote and also eh he got very mad , he was from california although he lived here mm i get very angry at the world the result yes of course . there is nothing that can be changed there is nothing that can be changed mhm it is very difficult to change a law that has been VBN it is very difficult to change a law that has been VBN many states have changed very much they VBD the theory of NN of the JJ books really they VBD the theory of NN of the JJ books it is true i have also read that and i can not believe it i don´t know how anyone can do that they VBD the theory of NN and say that god created everything they are teaching in the place of NN the government VBZ with the parties mhm the truth is that it is incredible yes , no and no one has said anything . they have VBN many times yes , i never heard a big NN about that , i would 've , well i do n't know i would n't let my kid go to a school like that no , no , certainly , the truth , it 's about i think the NN here of the united states is not i have no idea hello , this is mercedes , hello , yes hello , i do n't , ¿how are you ? , hello , fine , ¿how are you ? , oh , well , and , ¿what 's your name ? fine , uh , mercedes , yes it 's mercedes , oh , and my [ name ] is nice to meet you , well , we have to talk about politics yeah , and i do n't know much about politics because people is very uh , there 's a lot of corruption , so i do n't like politics a lot , and you ? uh , oh i do n't know much about oh , no , well , not much either , but still a bit , more or less , and , JJ you vote here in the united states ? oh , ¿where do you live ? uh , in philadelphia oh , and i [ live ] in new york , yeah and , JJ you vote in new york , have you ever voted ? yeah , they 're coming in november ok , right you know , so i do n't know , i do n't know and what , ¿and what did you think about the last candidate you voted for ? i do n't know the candidate for which you voted in november i 'm not , i do n't know , maybe , maybe yeah , yes , yes , i do n't know , and you ? okay , ah well , i ca n't vote here in the united states oh no , eh , because i 'm not a citizen oh , and my husband too hmm , hmm , okay so it 's a problem for , you know , but i do n't like the people you know aha so i do n't know , you have a husband ? yes and girl or boy , daughter , son , yes , how old are you ? ah , thirty NN and i 'm forty eight aha okay oh you , you 're very young , i have a daughter and she 's thirty , you know yes okay , and what do you think , for example , that there are only two JJ parties that what do you think that there are two JJ parties ah i do n't know do you agree yes or no maybe yes you know , and you okay ah , not completely because if they VBP the majority of the votes mm then eh , if they VBP too much and perhaps there 's no opportunity for NNS who perhaps have more NNS aha , mm but that belong to parties eh that are no as popular to get ahead oh , oh you , you work yes oh , okay and what do you also think for example of mm eh you mentioned the corruption before yes a lot of corruption and aha , what have you lived , the area where you live any experience with the corruption for example , mm yes an example there 's mm i do n't know i do n't know you know it has a lot of corruption but i do n't know what type or where you know mm no but , but you know i know there 's a lot of corruption ah okay but what type of situation has seemed NNS to you to say that there 's too much corruption ah , let me see , mm maybe , maybe you know , president bush , ah i is mm i do n't know you think no since , ah okay , aha yes yes , yes well and that 's the type of problem that having two JJ parties cause that ah when someone arrives to power they abuse the situation yeah do you have NN to vote , where are you from . no i 'm originally from honduras , honduras , yes ah where , oh honduras , oh and me here in ah , in ah in the united states but my mom she 's black hmm , hmm and dad comes from puerto rico so you know i don´t know too much about honduras but you know it has many problems there right are there many problems in honduras ? hmm , yes with politics right well yeah eh right now this year is the election year aha yeah and and we also have the problem of four political parties aha but only two parties are the most JJ then eh , there are people that , the people who usually are the NNS are people with a lot of money and they abuse of their power , hmm , yes oh , oh , no and how many years have ah you lived here in the ah , i have been here around seven years oh seven do you like eh united states , do you like it yes that is fine , yes i hope eventually to become a citizen and could vote aha that is true , and maybe to make a change to what politics is yeah yes hmm , one more to participate in the united states politics yes , yes do you have ah children yes , yes , yes , one , hmm , a boy , hmm how many , one , a boy oh and how old is he six months , thanks , yes , yes oh my goodness congratulations that is nice the first one how good hmm , yes ah yes also yes yes yes you are very tired and you also work wow oh man you know it is very late now VBP it is nine NN time to sleep yes and how many , how many calls do you have now or today , i have eleven calls ah oh no eh just one , nothing more than that , one , oh and and and all the days you have , do you want to talk to people right , ah , you have only one yes , yes yes oh boy i have eleven , eleven and yes yes , well eh VBG with the political issue and what do you think about the political system division in the united states with the NNP , the NN and NN , VBP the president , do you think he is intelligent , logical or not , do you agree well we have you know NNP you know the NNP , oh he is very rich but he does not have hmm oh yes yes yes much population but i don´t know maybe hmm he is not very rich so he is important no problem hmm but we have NNP you know NNP NNP no yes , he 's hispanic , and he comes from puerto rico so , but you know , he does n't have a lot of money so it 's not good for him JJ yes i was reading an NN that said that NNP does n't get a salary no , no , no , yes , he 's really rich , really rich that he works for a dollar his salary , aha , that his salary is a dollar , hmm . so yeah , only because he 's really rich hmm many people say this because he , he does n't work for more than a dollar for a , but yes it 's true , he only works for a dollar yeah yes and ehh , he 's satisfied with the work that he does yeah true he 's satisfied with the work that he does , yes or no ahh may be yes , may be no , i do n't know , i do n't know , i do n't know him much is he better than NNP ? ah , NNP really really good too , i do n't know , you know , but he has , NNP has a lot of corruption too ahh but you know , everyone likes NNP , you know , yeah , and you , RB , what 's he called , your mayor ahh , yes , the , hmm , we hello . hello . yes ? ah , i could n't hear you . my name is NNP , from texas . ah , i 'm manuel from chicago ah , we talked yesterday no ah we got again , the same topic . yeah . okay , it 's going to be hard to have another conversation on the same thing . yes . do you want to start ? mm i do n't know what . i ca n't think of anything . mm yes . ah . i suppose that basically i ca n't think of anything because the same as yesterday , ah . yes , it 's just that i did n't think it was the same . yes . it was very hard understand what he was saying but i think that i 'm understanding and it says that if the democratic party and the democrats are one NN in a NN . did you notice when he was saying what we had to talk about ? yes , yes , ah eh there are many things that you ca n't understand him . i did n't understand that at the beginning , yes , many times you ca n't understand him to good . but i think that what he was saying is that if they are two NNS in a NN . i mean that if they are the same thing or they are different . yeah . so , what do you think about that ? like i told you before , i believe in many things the same i think they have many things towards the end only care about one NN of society mhm in other words they should do more for society but they are like two NNS in a NN yeah there are things that divide society , for instance the right of homosexuals yeah the republicans say yes and the democrats say no other thing is how the money is spend republicans believe that there should be less social programs the government should not be taking care of NN expenses yes so they cut social programs for people , who truly needs it . in the NNP they use too much money for that yeah , i have heard that a lot what about democrats ? yes , i saw that they are against that , there are many people who truly needs it but there are also people who don´t even needs it . mm . mm mm . yes . there are many people that , that can work and do n't want to , or , or there are many people that that lie so they give them that money , when they should n't be VBG the money . yeah . exactly . mm , yeah , oh no , i do n't know what else to tell you . yeah , yes , i know . yes , yes . and you well that have never decided to vote , how come you 've never been interested in politics ? why ? well , for the same as many others . that 's very complicated and sometimes you go and if you want to vote , you vote and after you voted , i do n't know in a month , two , three months when they make the change in government and all you realize that well in reality it was n't what you were expecting . i mean , you get all your NNS up that now this will change , this year will be different , this president from this party will do this and practically yes they do for well for certain people only . but at least one at least , at least me eh i do n't , do n't notice much that one 's help makes much of a difference who wins . perhaps if they do it one VBZ it but that does n't interest me much . that 's why what i 've been seeing like i was telling you already since but do you keep informed of what 's happening or not ? well yes , sure , yes , i just keep out , not very mm , mm yes , yes i 'm ah aware of all that 's happening and all but up to there and nothing more . yes . i think that it 's important that the people , i mean that the , that that the people are active in , the politics of the country where one lives . then is hard for one to be interested in the politics when , when there are really no options or one feels that they are wasting their time alright . yeah . that there 's no , it does n't make a difference if the people go to vote or not . and after there were problems like in the elections , ah , they ones before the past ones . do you remember that there was this problem ? oh yes . they did n't know , they did n't know who had won the NN . and they had these problems in florida and they did n't know if someone had VBN or not . that it VBD mostly on this state who won , no ? yes , yes , because the voting system in the united states is really strange . like , people vote for the president but this does n't count . like , you go and vote and VB this number of people , it does n't count . each state has a number of NNS , who are those who go to vote . yeah . yes . so , what happened in these elections , NNP NNP , who was running for president , won the vote of the people . i mean , most of the people voted for him , yeah but as what it really counts is the number of NNS , the number of the NNS , then bush won because florida voted for him , so bush won the elections yes . nobody wanted the other to have more power , so , the ones from the north did n't want the ones from the south to be more powerful than them yeah . well yeah but right now it 's more like a tradition that has been around for years yes . because of these types of problems , some states should definitely not be VBN for others , or against the others yeah . well , that 's what they say , they are united , they are just one country and all of that but i think that nobody , nobody wants to change it . none none none none none none none none none none none none none none none good afternoon . NNP from connecticut . NNP , where are you from ? from philadelphia . mm . yes , that 's what i 've noticed , who knows why ? yes , how are you ? where are you from originally ? well , the university , i think , that 's over there , right ? yes , is here , i 'm in the university , in fact . ah , that 's why . ah , that 's why eh then , they are the ones that are doing the project , but here i have n't seen that much advertising . then , rather is people from the city . perhaps , or perhaps people from the city , perhaps they 've VBN in the city . not in the university . i want to try . so , what do you think of politics ? you are not a NN yet ? what ? are you a NN or not ? no , no , not yet , hardly , well in mexico i could but not here . you do n't vote . oh , okay . but but eh , eh , what the want to , what they want to know is whether you think there are NNS among parties , mm , let 's say if there is an agreement do you think that they reach such NNS even VBG to different parties ? mhm . what i have seen is that lately there are only liberal and JJ , de and regular , i mean there is n't even a difference about economy or , between countries , or NN or whatever it is they are doing , but they are only VBG on staying by the side of religion and and being , being JJ , and the others want rights . and that 's it , that is all i am seeing lately , and it looks to me that they are moving to both extremes , for some reason so , it looks to me that politics here in the united states is becoming a NN between them both , to see who makes everything a little more JJ and how the NNS make it to VB the current government and so on , but i do n't know . it is always a , a , how you call it ? a little , a little different , well i think that now even the democrats themselves are VBG and what do you think ? mm they are , they are somehow , eh , VBG , you know mm , they are just fighting , i think yes , they are getting angry with themselves , they are mhm like they do n't want other NNS and they do n't help themselves . i think there are NNS in the country , as long as there are two different parties sure there will always be a division , but that does n't mean , because in your country , if you vote mhm and do n't vote , eh , do you vote for the candidate or for the party ? oh , i do n't know because , because your beliefs are a part of , of if your family comes from this party , or you vote for no , i think that . for your own belief ? it 's for the candidate generally . in mexico , i saw , now they 're doing it more for the candidate because he 's given a party , no ? they do n't make any difference . like , they do n't give you any NN that they will do it better . so , i do n't know , but here for example , i 've seen how the parties have an idea , no ? so the NNS generally follow , like , the democrats generally follow this , eh , this side and the republicans follow the other . but what i do n't understand is this , if none of the two is very good , who ca n't there be something in between ? like , why does it have to RB be NNS or republicans , eh , and everyone else who is n't necessarily in the extremes . no , just remember that they come from different ideas , some are more conservative and others are more , how would you say ? more liberal , they 're called . hmm . you know ? the ideas of the republicans are a little more conservative hmm . well , yes . but i do n't know why they ca n't at least have , one in the middle who 's a little more JJ for people who are n't on one of the two extremes . they ca n't they VB ' go in because even the NNS need a certain amount of votes to get in , they have NNS and see if they get enough votes to enter the the the the race mhm . it 's quite hard . yes , they always fight , no ? yes , i think they do , it 's like if one of them is in power the other ones are against his NNS . with that , i do n't know , how is it ? even now , anyway , this government is putting up so many they can't NNS , no ? in all the NNS they are VBG conservative people , and that 's what i was thinking , the day when this , when this i mean , when bush leaves and a new president arrives , well everything is going to be conservative . i mean , the judges in general , they are still going to be , i do n't know if much is going to change because a new well , it has to change , there are so many things that the citizens do n't like no ? all the , they have to decide it when the next voting comes , what 's what they have to change and what does n't . i vote because i think it 's important that we , specially the hispanic , vote uh huh and , when i got here , uh , well , in my country i participated in helping politicians , but here i got a little more involved in politics oh , ¿yes ? to fight for our rights , specially hispanics in , uh , in connecticut , here where i live , there are plenty , white people control almost everything , and they do n't let the [ . . . ] participate much uh huh to do all those things in favor of our community right to VB our roots , to let them be known everywhere , yes , i think it 's important , it 's the same with the voting if you do n't vote , you do n't VB yourself , and you have no right well , that 's it ¿do you understand ? , so and why do n't , ¿why is it that so many people do n't vote here in the united states ? ¿what ? because i think about sixty percent of the people votes , ¿right ? , they said uh , but , specially , most of the elections here depends on hispanics , but hispanics have this NN of `` oh , i 'm not voting because i 'm not american '' , or `` i 'm not from mm . this country , i do n't have to see , the laws here do n't interest me but if you are living here you have to be interested for what 's here because here is where you are voting , you ca n't go to your country to vote . i do n't think that there are many countries that give you the right to vote like that well , yes , i think so . here in the united states you can be outside and can come to vote . you can vote by mail that they do , and but there are other countries where that is not VBN , you have to be present to vote . but you need the nationality , right ? to vote . here ? mm . yes , that 's why , then , well maybe half the hispanics still are n't . mm . mm . yes . and , and i saw that there are many , many hispanics in good jobs in the white house . not all , not all the the NNS give the hispanics the opportunity , but there are certain NNP i mean , certain NNS that do take the hispanics into account , for jobs because they know that besides they are bilingual that they help them we have a , the advantage that we speak two languages , after we learn english hmm . hmm . well yes , but how nice that they 're doing this , because if we 're all like this we need a little , and what is the , you do n't know what they say , then , for example , in california now ? because those who also voted for the governor were almost all hispanic and they 're doing worse with the NNS he made , no ? eh , i say , this is what i 've heard , i did n't pay much attention , so the truth is that well , i do n't know , i do n't know , how popular , how much hispanic population there in california , even if i think it 's pretty big . yes . the people who live there , you know ? those who are really , JJ hmm . no , they are n't hispanic because the hispanic at times , it 's well VBN , does n't know how to vote , you know ? does n't know who the candidate is so , sometimes , like , when they go to the NNS , because i worked helping , you know , to VB them , they do n't know where , what they have to do you sometimes have to go in with them to the machine to explain to them what they have to do , how they can vote eh , i think that they should give a few more classes , especially here in the united states so that they know more okay . it 's not the same in your language as here , when you go , well , there it is , it 's all in english , there are n't NNS in spanish , you know ? well , yes . hmm . and if there 's not a person also that helps in the NNS we realized one year mm . already when they returned it was already late for them to be able to vote . ah , really ? so , some one hundred fifty more people stayed without being able to vote that day because they would tell them that wow . ah , seriously ? this is your name but , or , or your name does n't appear here mm . understand ? so , no , eh we VBP hello ? hello , good evening . good evening , with whom do i have the pleasure of speaking ? with norma , from here , atlanta , georgia ah , norma , i think we already spoke once . ah yes ? my , my name is silvia , i live in philadelphia . ah , ok , yes yes , aha . yes it 's true , that we spoke , that you were telling me yes yes , that , that you had met that , that , em , you VBD with , with religious activities , and that you had met your husband , and that you had stayed there . aha , aha i think you are from venezuela , no . ah , from , from , yes well , yes . no and how are you , what do you think about politics ? ah , nowadays nobody seems to know anything , right . look , tell me about politics in peru . i , many years ago that i 'm not up to date with what is happening in peru . well so i 've lived here for about ten years , aha , aha , aha no , and well , i know that they changed the president , and well that people now are suffering , like before , like always . because there are n't jobs , that like , for , for the government to come , people are always bad . hmmm , hmmm . i think that are going to be more JJ to change , many times . ah , NNP , and he , a long time ago , yeah , he got out of there , and now he 's not , he VBD to japan ah , he took NN in japan because they VBD him . hmm , i think yes , the truth is i do n't remember , since i was n't there ah , aha , aha no , and and , he went , he VBD to ? no , of course , because they , they had bought what was really a , uh , a NN policy , so , the thing is , he stole money , money from uh right ? , from the country , something like that , so , uh yes so , uh , they VBD him , they wanted to , uh , put him in jail right , right but well , he VBD , he VBD political NN in japan , so oh i believe he 's been there up to this day so the japanese are VBG him yes and , and , how did a japanese man ever got to peru ? well , he 's nor really japanese , he 's peruvian right , but of japanese descent but he has , i mean , he 's from japanese descent , his family is japanese oh , and so , now , an i guess there must be some NN that , since he 's son of japanese right , right so you can VB NN in japan yes , maybe , maybe oh , so that 's why he , he VBD to japan , sure , right they give him citizenship or something like that , right , and , but , ¿are there many immigrants from japan to peru ? yes , more or less oh , yes uh huh that 's funny , and , and yes , there are lots of asian people in peru , that have , uh , they 're like very NNS there , they have their right their place , a very big place , where they have their stores and they VBP they VBP things from japan or china , or uh um from asian countries , and they have there ¿and what kind are there more of ? , or are n't there business NNP 's more or less a bit of anything , without anyone being the NN ? well , countries like that from asian countries , there are some that NN yeah , there are lots of chinese right there are lots of chinese in peru uh huh , uh huh chinese and japanese also , of course . aha no , and NNP oh , and is that something recent , or a JJ thing since a long time ago ? well i think that 's been a long time , right , that they started to VB . aha , aha no , is not , is not recent , it 's been a long time . hm mm , hm mm yes , because they already , i mean their generations , there are already that are peruvians right . ah , aha no , but well . aha , and what , and , and but maybe is like the chinese in the united states , that since they have chinese names , and since they look chinese , one keeps thinking of them as chinese . sure , i mean , they are different places , but well , one really does n't know why they have their JJ NNS , so similar . yes yes yes , yes . or if he 's chinese , japanese yes , yes yes yes , because one , does n't VB something like that the difference like that perhaps the JJ , one , one VBZ them faster . but , eh , between chinese and japanese and NNPS , i do n't VB . yes , yes , yes aha look , and , thinking of what famous peruvian i know , eh , i 'm thinking of NNP NNP NNP . ah yes , how and why ? no , really , i do n't know because maybe he does n't like it , but it could be because of the JJ , because i remember that he started hm quite to the left , no and later , through the yes , he even , even ran for the NN of the country . that , oh yes , i remember that , and never knew hm the details of , of , of , i only knew that , without , without any NN , of , of , of hm mm eh , that and and and he got close to VBG , or never had a chance to win . aha no , but yes but he lost . well , like , since he had recently entered , he had n't been in politics long , everyone knew him as a NN , no , but it 's different than being a , me being a writing , or being a no , but , he did n't win the NN . aha . and after this he moved to spain ? where , in peru , or in spain ? yes , he became a spanish national . ah and now , now he lives in spain , but i think that he will always go to peru , something like that , because he has family , his family is peruvian . well , yes , well people have different feelings yes they think different things , like everywhere , like here to the policy is n't , JJ , very good let 's say , everyone NNS his aha what 's convenient for him , no . no , every , bush VBZ the rich more who are his common people . yes he 's making a lot of mistakes . yes , and compared to here there are two parties and in other countries there are many countries , for example , in peru , how many NN parties are there ? well , there are also the democrats and the republicans there too , no . ah , only two ? the others , yes , like , there are several parties , aha it 's not like the left and the right , they 're called more hm no , or , and the democratic party , i do n't know , where and the liberal party , there 's , i know , there 's about four parties that are most JJ , and there are other smaller ones ah there there are always and today , what party is in the government ? hmmm no , what party is in the government in peru today ? hmm , aye , i do n't even know . i know that it 's NNP , but i do n't know what party this would be . aha , aha . and how 's this president , do they see him well or do they still feel like he 's not helping ? no , it 's the , the NN is there as always , no . ah yes yes they go JJ , there they also go JJ . sure , like , here you , you 're surprised thinking that it 's a very advanced country , and you come here , and you say , well not really , you will meet people who are NNS or something like that but you find them everywhere yes , yes , it 's a shame really aha yes , and , hmm what 's it called , and peru em , tell me a little big about the regions of peru , and what regions it 's divided into . aha there 's a lot of NN . hmm no , that goes to brazil . how pretty it must be , it must give this so much diversity . aha no , but there are some small , small groups that are still NNS from the indigenous , and they 're VBN there and after , well , in the NN of course , there are these native groups . like NNS ? yes , NNS , ah . ah sure , including , like , the JJ NN , it 's a very very deep NN , and you really do n't know who lives there hmm there are human groups that are JJ . aha aha no , there are small , small indigenous groups , but the majority are interracial , spanish crossed with indians . hmm aha aha yes , well , and are you an american citizen ? no , i 'm a NN who can , ah NN , yes , because you have to be a NN for five years yes , and , what do the latinos in atlanta think about politics here in the united states ? aye , well , i do n't know , the majority , i do n't think that the majority really agree , above all for the JJ people who are here ah , why , why do n't they VB them ? sure , well here the , here in georgia the JJ people ca n't drive , they ca n't have , well they drive , but they drive because they want to drive , they can buy a car , drive , and i do n't know how they do it , but anyway they ca n't have , no , VBZ hello hello hi , how are you ? fine , fine , and you ? fine thanks , my name is ernestina ernestina aha okay my name is NNP NNP aha , NNP oh NNP , and where you do live ? in houston , texas oh boy , and me new york new york in new york , ah , yes and where are you from originally ? where ? in , in the bronx from VB what ? the bronx from the bronx ah okay , have you always lived there in the bronx ? right , i live in the bronx ¿have you always lived in the bronx , your whole life ? yes , yes oh yeah , ¿and you ? oh , no , i 'm from puerto rico oh , my mom , she came from puerto rico and my father is black . so , you know uh huh and , ¿how many years have you lived in texas ? oh , i have been living here for only four years oh , and , ¿do you like texas ? oh , no , i do n't like texas , it 's not no , uh uh , it does n't have mountains , it 's very hot , very JJ yeah and houston is very big but it does n't feel like a city , like new york does , everything 's too far away , there 's never anyone in downtown , no one NNS on the street no , right it 's not , it 's a big city , but it does n't feel like a traditional big city wow yes , uh huh , and it 's getting better , NNS are VBG but on july and august , the heat is horrible mm oh my aunt lives in dallas aha but it has many people from louisiana , new orleans now right . yes , yes there are many people that , who came over here there are many people that had come here also before the hurricane , yes ah the people are in the street ah , i think that they 've found JJ housing for the majority of the people . ah , the government ah , found them apartments or oh ah , places that they use for camping , or for weekend activities they are using them as JJ housing . yeah but i think that the majority of the people have decided not to return to new orleans because since they are so JJ and they could n't fix the NNS and they do n't know if there 's another NN and the same thing will happen . mm many people have decided that they are not going to return . yeah so i do n't know if all those people will stay here and it will be hard for , for all of them to find jobs , and yeah yeah mm , mm is a big problem , right yes , yes ah a lot of water in the street . aha oh boy that is very , very bad mm and , and politics , you know ah , ah , politics yes , yes , i do n't know why they do n't change the topic , i 've been talking about politics for the last five days . i do n't know much true yes , ah yes they do n't change the topic , i wrote them a message , i sent them an email to the person who 's in charge of the study and i asked if i had to talk about politics all the time and he told me no . aha that if i got tired of talking about the topic i did n't have i could talk of anything , that after that yeah that we have a natural conversation and that it lasts twelve minutes , it does n't matter what we are talking about so if you do n't want to talk about politics we do n't have to talk about politics , mm right every day ah , how many calls do you have now ? ah , i think that like eight or nine . me , ah , like maybe thirteen really , oh wow mm yeah thirteen maybe fourteen mm ah and how did you find out about the study ? what ? how , how did you know about the study ? ah ah i don´t know someone told you , oh , oh , oh yeah , yeah my . my friend she tells me she told me and you ? hmm hmm yes and i , i found it , there is a website named NN oh , yeah , yeah yes and i always look there , hmm is that true , a NN hmm maybe my friend hmm no my friend , my friend hmm you know hmm that is nice that is very good . all the days he calls , a call uh i , i , i called everyday ah , oh i called called called all the days hmm , yes and a long time mm mm and you have kids and kids and and no , i have two cats . two cats no husband mm , mm no sons nor daughters , no , no no , boyfriend yes i have a boyfriend oh , well yes , mm yes i 've had a husband for twenty , twenty years . aha oh wow yeah , i 'm forty eight oh yes , i 'm only twenty six oh , you , you are very young yeah well at my age my mom already had three kids , yes oh yeah yes , yes and ah , you go to school yes i 'm , i go to VBG school oh yeah , you like school uh um um , ¿what did you say ? , ¿what did you say ? ¿what ? are you studying in school ? oh , NN , VBG oh uh huh , uh huh oh , that 's good yes , there 's a lot of work yeah so i do n't have to worry much about becoming JJ oh and , ¿have you ever gone to puerto rico ? yes yes , yes , well , i moved four years ago , but i still go there , i go there every year oh , and , oh yes you come from , ¿you come here to new york ? yes , i have one , yes , i have an aunt that lives there in brooklyn oh and i have been there three times oh yeah yes , uh huh oh , that 's good yes and i live in the bronx , but there 's a lot of people that , that has , and it 's very poor yes and it does have lots of puerto ricans , dominicans uh huh uh , mexicans uh huh you know , but the people is really poor uh huh they do n't have a lot of pesos [ dollars ] , and , ¿are you rich ? that 's why i 'm doing this study , because i have a huge NN of money yeah no , i 'm studying full time now , so i do n't work yeah , yeah uh huh and what , what time do you , go to school , at night ? no , no i go during the day , so i am not working because i go to school during the day . oh NNP you also speak english ? that is good and what else ? hmm yeah that´s good that is good . only english and spanish hmm hmm that is very good . and where are your cats now ? oh , here with me are they big or small ? no , they are big they are , a . NN and a female oh the female cat NNS around ten NNS and the NN around sixteen NNS . wow hmm they are big yes uh hmm how big yes , but it is good that i have two , because as i have to study a lot and i am yeah studying NN i have to do the practice twelve hours at the hospital . wow so it 's good that they 're two because the NN each other , i do n't know , they do n't get bored alone here in the apartment . yeah , that 's not good , one alone . mhm mhm yes you know , and do you live in a big house or , do you have a small house ? yes it 's a very small apartment , yes oh mhm and me too mhm i have an apartment mm apartment and do you have children ? yes , no i have a daughter , a daughter mhm aha and just that oh fifty years , fifty two oh , my , daughter , no , no , she 's ah , my sister is fifty two years old . aha my daughter is thirty , yes , she 's , she 's a lawyer , lawyer lawyer , yeah , uh lawyer and , VBZ she live there in new york too ? yes , she lives in new jersey ok ¿do you know new NNP ? uh huh , yes , uh huh oh , you know a lot , oh yes , i visited oh uh , yes , i was going to visit but i decided to come to houston oh , that 's good uh huh that 's very good , good uh huh and , ¿where are you visiting , oh , what other ? , wait , ¿where are you visiting ? uh , ¿where else have i gone to here in the united states ? yes i have a sister that lives in florida aha and wow how nice florida yes she lives in NNP oh then i go visit her quite often . but i 've been in NNP oh wow yes in NNP oh how nice and mm hello hello , ah , what 's your name ? eh , what 's your name ? eh sorry hi it does n't matter , any , yes any , i 'm pilar , i think that we 've talked once before i think so too , how are you ? fine fine , and you ? who is it ? eh what do yes where are you calling from ? ah , i 'm calling from miami from new york , hmm , what do you think about religion ? what these people said , do you think it divides people or not ? it depends i think that if you have the same , ehh , the language or thoughts that the other person has but if they 're different i think it divides , of course , because if you 're christian , and the other is jewish and the other is muslim , i do n't remember how you say it in spanish , they wo n't have the muslim , eh , muslim aha , they wo n't have the same , you know , religion or the same idea or whatever yes but you think that this divides people , you think that the fact of having a different religion that they ca n't at least be friends or get along well no , what i want to say is that they can be friends and they can get a lot but when the topic of religion of course they will be , you know , divided because they do n't believe in the same but i do n't think that if you know , if a person is christian , another person is jewish , that they ca n't be friends , of course hmm this is also something personal because some people are n't like this either , you know yes . because they believe that if you are not what you know , if not , if you do n't believe what they believe well then or that it 's not so much in your opinion , not is so much the religion that divides but rather the people themselves that use religion , at best in some way more , more extreme or more no , and to separate from society or from people of other religions . yes , yes . no , or i mean the religion itself , or at least the religion , religions that i 'm familiar with teach you to be JJ , teach you to be , to be good right ? yes they do n't teach ah , that the people from other religions should be VBN or that they do n't deserve to live or anything like that , right ? yes religion does n't teach you that , and yet there are people , those who are very extreme and VB it that way yes , but it 's true , but also i believe that if it , eh , you know , if you are so , um , talking on the theme of religion , or whatever , you know so then this is what divides also , because i ca n't let 's say if , if i am jewish and i ca n't say if i believe what you believe or i eh , eh think the same as what you think if you are a christian , because they are n't , you know yes they are not the same religion in that way , but at the same time you know , i believe that yes but this is n't a reason for division , the fact that this , in all the NNS , people have JJ opinions , JJ beliefs , and this doesn't does not have to bring any problem to anyone , you know ? no division . yes , yes and no but what i want to say that if it 's worth living because i ca n't , you ca n't have your opinion because what i want to say that we are not going to be equal , if we are not equal we are not united , so then we are divided , you understand ? well it also depends on if you 're referring to being divided , like , i think that the fact that people have different religions and different beliefs , well that if everyone were equal , i do n't think that there would be JJR problems , it would be boring yes but being divided also , like , in my opinion NNS more to the fact that people do n't speak to each other , there are n't problems in that society is divided into groups of people who have different religions and fight between themselves like has happened , has happened in history like keeps happening now , this is why i VBP to the division yes , no the fact , the fact that people living in the same country have different beliefs , and they can get along well , i do n't see any problem , no ? no no no this , you know , because i do n't think that i can tell someone how to live or what to believe , this is something that you know , they have to , eh , you know , i ca n't think of the word , eh hmm it 's something that the person has to do himself , his own decision , you know , it 's not something that i can say to someone you have to believe this , you have to believe that sure but no so you know well it depends on the in on how easy it is to influence this person because in the end when we 're kids yes the religions are VBN in us , and tell us that you have to believe this , and as kids we 're very JJ yes they believe it yes ah what else it said in the topic oh i do n't know i never understand him yes i heard is that he is very hard for me , i just hear not hear the message was terrible , RB said i hardly hear it but i did understand something else but is that i do n't remember what he has said , ah i do n't remember well , eh we can talk about something else it does n't have to be the topic no no it does have to be about the topic if it 's not the topic the call is not valid no i read the NNS and they said that the topic is to help you but one does n't necessarily have to talk about the topic ah really because i , i had a lot of problems once with a person that could n't connect , we could n't talk and i read the NNS and that 's what they said ah well ah yes yes so that pardon no keep on keep on that you get cut , keep on eh , but if you prefer we can talk , keep talking about the topic if ah i do n't care is that i thought , i had read that if you do n't talk of the topic it does n't count , the call does n't count , that if you talked of something else it did n't count that 's why , that 's why i always try to talk about the topic okay , well so let 's continue with the topic because but no what i said , i read it because i thought that it was that it said something like that if those know that these conversations are very eh NN so to speak then they give you the topic to help you yes of course when i have eh talked with the other people eh not always , not always do we talk about the topic we talk yes the other day i talked with a guy from new york who was a cop yes and we spent the whole time talking of you know his job because i found it very interesting but eh but the calls you do n't know yet , is that i do n't know i think that the only reason if the call is valid or not valid is if you have talked for twelve minutes mm is what i think which that has happened to me many times , well it has happened like four times that i 'm talking with a person and the call gets cut off ah yes it has n't happened to me yes oh what happened to me yesterday was that they called me and told me okay wait on the line for the other NN and then suddenly they tell me NN and hung up on me and me okay no no that has n't happened to me so and well anyways returning to the topic , are you then religious or not ? or you do n't have any religion ? JJ religious oh um i do n't think of myself as religious i you know read the bible , go to church , eh you know pray with my family but for me a a religious person , is a person that has many rules , many eh well , what i mean is that is if you have a religion or not , EX 's what i mean yes , i think i do , yes eh , but what are you ? are you catholic or what ? christian , mm christian , and what do you think about the other religions then ? what do you think about muslims ? do you believe in god ? oh now i remembered what the subject was about , i just remembered whether we believe that religions are actually different ways of seeing the same thing , for instance jewish , muslims and christians they all VBP the same , they are based in the same book , well they are not based in it but jewish and christians are in the old NN and muslims do have also an old NNP as a part of their religion mhm it 's funny , is n't it ? so , how do you see that ? would you say it 's three different ways of , ah , actually VBG the same god ? it 's more or less the same , is n't it ? well i think that , to start with the jewish , that the bible , the first part of the bible , the old NNP yes , mhm , yes is the same thing that JJ believe in , i think that if it was not for the old NNP listen NNP ? ¿hello ? hi hi i 'm miguel angel , ¿who are you ? oh , NNP NNP ? yes , NNP hi , ¿and where are you ? uh , in philadelphia oh , me too oh , you too , no i think , you work at , uh , ¿are you a student at penn ? yes too , yes , in penn of , it was biology , VBP n't it ? no , no , of chemistry , yes , yes no , chemistry , yes , i have spoken to you before oh , oh , we talked , that 's true , we talked the other day , ¿right ? yes , yes yes , that you 're doing economy , ¿right ? exactly , exactly yes . how are you ? fine , fine here , just doing a little bit of NN , of NN and aha . and they called , then yeah well , why not rest a little , right ? sure , me too , they have also called me , yes they called me yesterday and i could n't could n't accept the call because i was busy , and today i say , well eh well i 'm going to talk a while yes , yes , no because very good , sure . because that 's at six in the evening . eh , eh , of the afternoon , and , and at nine , right , and if one does n't get it , already , is hard yes , sometimes well there are days that they call you twice . i to find . if you do n't answer at six , perhaps later at seven , later at eight they call you again eh . but yes , yes , yes , and NNP . i sometimes do n't want to call myself but but is sure , if there 's no other person waiting for the call , well , sure , no , . eh . no , but the problem with , with that of six is that that , because i talk on the cellular phone , then i have a limit of how much i can talk during the day . ah , okay . and , eh , then is a bit annoying , but , ah , but i think that this call is free eh , yes , this no i mean they do n't charge you anything , no ? but this call no , no , well , well , they do n't charge me but there is a NN i i have six hundred minutes each month ah , yeah , independent from the number you call and , exactly , yes , yes . so , because i do n't have a land line aha so , like that , normal , like from from home , it 's just a , a cell phone , it 's the , the only thing i have yeah , yeah you do n't have a line yes do why , where are you living , in a college ? i do n't have a land line , no , no , no . only a cell . yeah , yeah , yes . but where are you living , e eh college house or , oh . in a NN , or yes , well , in a NN house . pardon ? a NN ? ah . i in a yes , yes , so no , here there 's a public phone . yeah . below . and you do n't have a phone in the room ? and it 's the university 's . no , i do n't have a phone in the room . ah , that i believed you had , ah yeah , yeah , hm mm , hm mm , yeah but yeah , yeah , yeah , it almost does n't matter any more , because no , with the phones , yes now almost every one yes , yes , now almost every one that i , i know that that lives , well that only lives in the NNS one has a line , right , but all the same , the people , every one has cell phones , everyone all those who live every one has , how , how do you call them here , NNS all , all the students that in spain we call it mobile sure , the NNS , ah , yes , NNS . but , both , if it 's mobile the cell , yes , yes , yes . yes . yes , no . everyone has it . yeah . and it 's not necessary to have a phone NN , NN fixed yeah no , no , and also , every one that lives , um , like in an apartment that , like that , that , that , that does n't , that does n't , that does n't live in the NNS , almost no one has a phone , like that a land line . sure , because they telephone is really expensive because you have pay , eh , even if you do n't VB , even if you do n't use it , you have to pay a minimum NN . and besides , and then , after if you have the cell , well , because , no , and many people do n't use NNS so , exactly . they 're never at home , and prefer people to call the cell , and , yes . this happened to me , i have , i have a land line , but the truth is that i give the same , and i do n't know why i have it , because yes . because i never use it no , no , a land line is good , for example , if you have a family and it 's a home , there are several people , and yeah . sure you , eh , because sure you will need so something right , on the phone , and maybe several people want to get on the phone , sure , i also keep the telephone you know why , because i do n't know but , yes . if i want to call my family in spain , it 's much cheaper . ah . to call them from a land line than from a cell phone , you know . s and , but , and do you use the , the calling cards ? ah , yes . yes , i started to use it this call but you know what happens , every time i call yes ah then , i 'm calling spain less and less every day , then it 's almost not worth it , you now , to buy a card that maybe will VB soon ah , that 's true , that 's true the balance , or it 's true , it 's true you know . at first , i did buy them , yes , yes . because i called a lot . but now i do n't call that often to , eh , to spain but , the calls , the calls to spain must be almost free , right , with the , with the phone card . i guess i see . well , it 's not . it 's cheap . i think that , well , look . about the phone , i 'm living in NNP place , well because , uhm , well , i lived in france , because i studied in france for a few months . so when i was there yeah , yeah my mom used to call me yes and it was , say . i was three cents a minute , two cents a minute yes , yes , no and still , it is still more expensive the cell phone , yes no , it is incredible , because , um , we call from guatemala , because there because my dad my dad lives in guatemala , and of course , of course . for a minute , yes , yes . yes . and now , we are paying fifteen cents . but well , that makes sense , because of course , television has got cheaper the telephone because because because JJ phones loose NN against the cell phone . JJ , to people use them , well , they are cheaper yes . and everybody uses cellular , you know . yes , yes . for calls , yes . that is , that is . yes , but . they VBP through perhaps is only of the internet right , but , that is . is some similar NN , right . then they VBP sure in their network much more RB . yes , yes , yes , yes , perfect . mm hmm . uh huh , uh huh . yes , or if , what can you do , of course . they have , they have been able to do it much more RB . so then yes , in spain NN in spain the same thing happened . yes , ah , yes , yes . with the telephone NN because telephones was a public company hm and , then when they VBD , well , i 'm not sure , it 's not , i do n't know if they had VBN everything . i believe that now yes , they have VBN it all . from other , from other telephone companies , and , and other companies came in , well , not that they came in , it 's that they created telephone companies in spain besides the telephone . and `` NNP '' VBN to low the prices because they had NN . before , like they were the only ones , well , they could charge what they wanted you know . and , of course . and , and , `` NNP '' . now the , now many spanish companies , spanish have VBN abroad , specially in latin america , specially `` NN '' , because the market , of spain it has became more difficult , right . there is , there is more NN and it is a more mature market , then they are in latin , latin , latin america where still nobody has a cell phone , there are many many possibilities . aha . have VBN yes yes , in these NNS . it 's very interesting . aha . aha so , for example , NNP , this was one of the companies , so i had , it 's an insurance company . so i had to go on the internet to see ah , well , this is , this is interesting , right ? and yes , so , so i went , true , i learned that many , a lot of spanish companies , and what they were doing , hmmm , hmmm . no , but , yes , well yes . the , no , yes , yes , yes . no , and there , e in eighty six , since then , it seems that companies say , well , all of a sudden they have more competition , and , and they have , ah , yes , yes , no . if one want to continue all of a sudden , they started to to , to , VB abroad , yes . eh , yes . hm social too , i mean it 's true , it 's true . VB the way of thinking , the people , more NN , you know i do n't know , i mean , more , i mean yes , it 's true . no , no , i . yes , yes . ah , yes yes well in spain , believe me , the change has been total . like you could be something else yes , yes , yes . because it was practically , not just the JJ religion , but NN , you know hmm and RB , after , well , when NNP died , and , in seventy eight the whole spanish constitution , well , was given freedom of NN and everyone could have the religion that they wanted , you know . but , with NNP , no , in fact the NN is good afternoon , how are you ? good , thanks , and you ? good , i think that we have already spoken before right . what , where are you ? i 'm in atlanta , georgia norma ah , norma , how are you , i 'm josefina , in philadelphia , yes . ah yes yes , we spoke before you remember now aha , yes , they 're like VBG us around no , to to once again . one round yes yeah that look it looks like it , but aha i , i do n't care well , to chat again we keep going on and on no . this about religion JJ my god , this people . hmm mm i do n't know about you but i 'm catholic , well we do have lots of people that are catholics here too . others are from different areas of christianity and not all aha , the different religions , the different NNS . no , really and we , one really VBZ with a religion , it unites people because even , when there are natural NNS , it does n't matter which religion you have . that 's right , it 's like hm mm everybody gets together and they start , VBG or , to sure , i mean , it's in their own words , they each use their words . you always look for god 's help . you always know there 's a JJ being that 's gon na help us , ¿right ? , and yes , of course you go to it 's NN and how 's , ¿how 's the situation there right now ? , the weather and all that ¿where , here in atlanta , georgia ? oh , right , ¿oh yes ? yes , i mean , more or less , right , like it always is , always the NN , the gas has increased a lot and right , there comes this thing that , right , oh my god yes , the gas has increased a lot , three dollars thirty , something like that , the regular right no , and , uh and it 's being spent sure , and people , well and it VBZ away quickly now there 's one that they 're looking after others , some , uh uh , uh NNS , ¿right ? , to driving , or car NN or something like that they 're selling here , i see lots of people who have large NNS yes the new , pretty ones , but , they put them on sale oh , oh , they 're selling those , sure , because they VBP lots of gas , really for sale , oh you spend a lot on gas they turn uh huh or , money NNS like water that 's true , the people really has n't had much , and they say `` oh , i have s little , i 'm gon na save '' right and in the end , they do n't save anything they go yes , yes , you think you 're VBG and in the end , it turns away and the money is over you get , uh , yeah , you get in a bad mood yeah , right because , instead of spending ten , you spent twenty five , and such , where you 're going to do sure if one goes out to buy something , you always remember that you missed something , then hm mm ah me yes , in small things , even if one does n't feel it , later already yes , i do n't know and so hard already for money to come in , right . it goes out fast , but nothing , to come in you have to look for it , really look for it . ah , is it hot there ? no , it 's already like , like NN already of it 's already getting cold here too . yes , the NNS are very cold . is not too yes ? aha aha , here also , and one VBZ the windows , then later hm mm at NN it gets hot . yes you feel hot , and later again now starts a little NN , to get NN . but you do n't have to wear a NN , is no , no , not yet everything is good now . ah seeing things yes , you open the , no , if you see the news on the internet , television , you get more depressed because so many NNS , that someone dies , that someone killed himself , aha , yes no , NNS , they killed someone , that , that i yes , ah , no , the crimes have returned yes so , much violence , really in this world no yes , i do n't understand . i say that i have two , two NNS in this aspect . sometimes i like , sure , that they help everyone in the world to be equal , and that everyone has the same opportunities . and at best they will hurt someone , hmm ? aha , yes , this is true , there 's always i get a like NN on that , of being more strict , right ? , the people NN , right ? the problem is that i used to live in los angeles , in a neighborhood beside the gay district oh , ok no . and form my window i could see other buildings where the NNS lived in . and they used to VB a lot at night hm mm they were there , well dressed in their NNS and NNS , but hm mm they were suffering . i remember i did that comment . oh , m but that people is JJ and they look so fine , but yeah they can do anything , because , due to their sexual NNS they are VBN , exactly yes , no , and now it is they , got together themselves , and instead of laughing they were crying . and i thought , oh well , is this people never gon na be happy ? because they used to make NNS , you know , they went out JJ hm mm VBG on the streets sure but yet , they were somehow NNS , sad , i do n't know sure , i mean , sometimes i eh i think that there are times , a situation , very , no , very terrible for them , no . to , to too extreme . like , for each one here that each one has their freedom , no one gives them , there are people who are really born so , they do n't have these , these NNS , this karma , what 's it called , from of being , eh , changing things . hmmm and there was a school for gay kids , who know that , they have this since they 're little , and they're these NNS , an yes , ah , i did n't know this . ah , yes , and and that is what i see , that if for example i 'm in their way of being , and they like it like between themselves , well i do n't know if hm mm if they should , keep on VBG in VBG to others that , that are mixed . i do n't know . i think that would be worth studying a lot right . aha no , IN they are good people , are good friends , i know that sure , eh , one well aha that there are very good people . i like to VB with everybody , but hm mm if they are going to be in a place , they are going to be VBG them bad and all that , well sure , i mean , that already is i do n't think part of the karma of each person no , because one is born , i , we believe in one aha . yes , of the NNP . yes , i 'm , i belong to the , a NNP religion . then we believe in the karma . each person has a yes , a reaction for the positive or negative activities that yes , in the past and in the no , then that , the case of the NNS , is , is a type of karma , that they come to this world to suffer no . ah very interesting . for some negative activity that they did in their past life . sure , and that , i mean , the problems live this life as positive as possible , no , according hm mm , mm mm within the , i mean , within their groups , of them , how they are called , no , and is i say put when they VBP doing the more positive things , so that en the next life , good , they 're not suffering like this like now yes , i do n't know of your , of your religious NNS , if there is some NN of homosexuals or not well , really there is not a NN because it 's not , exactly a NN no hm but always , there always is a group of people that know that your religion there exists a group of people that really that VBZ a little , a topic like that well if you are of the family , of the family clearly , or , us here , we accept people , it does n't matter what NNS or activities that they have . no but , there is a process by which one is VBN , and those oh , it wants to leave follow some rules , one knows that religion has rules and NNS aha no , and in agreement with that , if one wants to be VBN to god , one has to follow rules and NNS , not be JJ , o man or woman , because the same we are all JJ right . exactly . i would like to know that one VBZ his NN to god . hm mm well one does n't want for one 's mind to be VBN , then there 's where the thing is , that one is not going to be as open with with a person , how you treat hm mm sure , there 's always that NN , no , that some aha like are NNS , that are homosexuals that try to influence . yes yes JJ NNS , and all that matter like that . good evening , good evening , i 'm JJ yes , ah , good evening , ah , i 'm alex . from here , los angeles . where are you from ? and how are you ? how 's everything going there in los angeles ? it 's good , the weather is sunny here we have everything 's good a bit of bad weather is coming here , a NN is coming here . but , the weather 's already changing here , the NN , the temperature , there there are seasons , yes yes , there in los angeles you do n't see the seasons , the change , right ? very little very little , yes yes , a little but not , not like there in denver yes , here you really notice , eh , the four seasons , and well , the topic of today is religion ¿what 's your name ? my name is NNP , NNP NNP NNP , NNP NNP ok like NNP , but NNP NNP and you 're alex , and , ¿what 's your last name ? oh , NNP NNP NN , and , ¿are you from mexico or are you from los angeles ? yes , uh , i 'm from here , from los angeles i 'm a lot , i 'm from puerto rico , but i 've been living here for like twenty six years here in colorado yes yes , even my daughter was born here and all that , ¿do you have a family ? yes , i 'm from . . . colombian oh , that 's good but i have a small family i have friends from colombia , and well , very nice people of good culture and all that , i love the music from there too , their culture [ it 's ] very nice over there , ¿have you gone there recently ? no , a very long , long time ago i yes , wow many years how many years ? like twenty oh , my goodness i , i , i consider myself american and i am here because i am VBG spanish yes yeah , to puerto rico i have not gone there since since i think that thirteen years ago , when my dad died yes , i have not gone , and it has changed a lot , because each time i see a picture there is something new , they are making new things oh , yes all change change a lot and what do you think of religion ? well religion i think that eh , today instead of using it to unite people it is been used to divide because of the religion many people is being killed , i personally i have a big love for god and and i do have my own religion i can see the religion is so divided these days , everywhere from , the religion of the jews , the muslims , the one that is VBN as if it was christian but i really don´t know , so what , what the bible teach us and in the true religion , well i think it is not VBN today as it should yes , i , i agree a lot with that , a lot ah , i see much NN in religion me too a lot and no well people go to church but the do not do not practice to themselves , to other people the same and the people is so religious , they are so , like i said in spanish , they judge other people yes , quite a lot they judge you and ah , oh , i do n't know it 's they way the NN it , for example , it 's not that i 'm trying to speak badly of the catholic church but , lately , lots of things have come to light about the religious people , priests that have done these terrible things and have abused young people and done JJ things and now this is coming to light because it was kept RB for a long time , people knew what was happening happening but now it is coming to light and all those NNS that have been VBN everywhere , here in colorado there 's one from eight people this happened in the seventies yes , and they are , the man that did this , the priest , he died but there 's so much people speaking about what he did back then the now , they have a good NN to VB the NN against the catholic church , but just like the catholic church , other religions that VBP to follow god , they still , well i say , the bible says somewhere , by the fruit you will know the that , if you look at the people and the fruit that they are VBG is not good , then it means that something is wrong with that religion yes , i like the catholic church , i was raised as one and i think that there 's a lot of NNS in it . i think so too and oh i 'm not a catholic anymore but that 's true , i agree with you , i VBD so much NNS and my dad , i used to think he was a NN too because he used to say , i will remain a catholic until i die but while we were VBG church he would do other things and then . oh , and they love money too no , they love money , he liked to VB and the bible clearly says that you ca n't love god and money at the same time exactly and what i 've seen in religion is a lot of love for money . and little help for poor people and also in the name of the church or god there are these , it 's like , they support this war when god , it 's not a god of war no , and so since they say that he 's VBG the , for example here , i really love this nation because it has given me many opportunities , i 'm not VBG it or anything but what i say is that using god to support the NNS who are fighting in other countries then is like if all others were bad and the truth is that in other countries there are these fanatics , true , because for example in iraq , for example with these fanatics who do n't care and kill people , if they 're soldiers that they 're killing , or kids , it 's , an NN , i think it 's terrible yes but , god does n't deal with killing people or wars exactly in any religion in any religion but when there 's NN , religion VBZ another level RB they use it to , to support the cause for example catholics use religion to get a lot of money exactly for the NNS of the priests yes that 's why they 're so rich this is something i 've never liked . me neither , and those who are so rich and have , and have their NN of art work and all this there inside of of what do they called that , there in rome is the JJ sixty nine what ? that is has the NNP NN , that has a lot of artist 's NN of within the NNS , and that , that they VBP those NNS for them and all that money , and their NN for example in the times of the second world war that VBD the NNP a lot also is an old religion . very JJ , that does n't change with the times either that 's why i 've never liked it and how do you see the other religions , i mean that are not christians how well , i do n't like the christian VBZ much either because they are very JJ people that judge everyone if one does n't believe in jesus christ in a certain way aha you go to hell . you are going to VB there . and well i think that there are good people in all the religions , there are jews , there are muslims , there are i think that his day will come then for god there are no wars or any of that i think that the only one that can clean this world of so many bad things that are happening is him i know he will do it in its due time because man has tried to solve the issues for NNS and look how things now keep on getting worse . in fact they are so bad that we are true , the NN those are not NNP things yes here the concept is , if you do n't have money , you 're called a NN because ah , this is horrible . yes , religion is more than anything created for man and VBN and everything , in , in its way . for example many of these things that i 've seen on television from other religions , for example NNS teach yes , exactly so you believe in this , you ca n't believe in wars . instead of learning what 's taught in the bible , well , learning what the men teach hmm , true and look at home many religions these days say that they 're christian , and have so many different things you , do you go to a religion ? do you follow or a religion ? or do you go to church ? well , i , i was a jehovah witness for a long time but not anymore because i had some problems in my marriage that really got to me in a spiritual way , but that has been my faith since i was a teenager . in the beginning i was a catholic , i was raised as one and then i became a NNP , i was looking for something , so i found it and i think that i really found him and did n't that religion ask you for money the whole time . no , not my religion , they would n't ask for money . hello hello how are you ? fine , with whom do i have the pleasure of speaking ? ah , ernestina sorry ? my name is ernestina . and you ? i 'm silvia oh , and where do you live ? i live in philadelphia . and you , ernestina ? ah , new york ah new york , ah , nice , yes , i 'm forty eight . hmm and i have a daughter and she 's thirty and she has a son , he 's two . aye how nice and you ? i have three kids oh yes , that are , the oldest is twenty four and the youngest is twenty . oh yes oh , and the kids live with you ? no , no eh , my daughter lives in washington . and a son is here in philadelphia but in the city , in the university ah , how nice and , and another son is in the state of new york oh yeah eh , yes , yes , also in the university what university ? in , he , that one is in NNP oh NNP university . yes , yes , aha yes , that 's good and , and yes , and what country are you from ? ah , bronx ah , from bronx yes but of latin parents without a doubt oh yes , many latins here , many the people here very poor , you know they do n't have money . ah in the bronx , they have many , ah , people from puerto rico , dominicans and look , look mexicans and cubans aha , aha and dark skinned too . yes , mhm you know and your family from which country do they come from ? my mom comes from puerto rico , san juan and my dad he 's black ah yes from the united states ? yes ah , well how well you learned spanish . ah , thanks , yes , yes mm but my mom , i do n't speak much because she does n't live now , today , you know , she 's not alive but and NN , my dad too . they 're not alive any more , yes , no ah , that 's a pity . yeah and you ? where are you from ? i , i 'm cuban , yes oh cuban yes , yes oh how nice yes , thanks , yes and your mom and dad eh , they are no longer living oh yes , eh , yes they were cuban also . oh , and how many years have you been here in the united states ? in the united states , ah , like forty years . ah forty yes , yes , well , more than forty years , yes . oh boy wow , you speak english also ? yes i also speak english oh boy that 's good yes , yes and , and ah , that the word today is a yes religion . you i do n't know much about ah ah you know yes , that , they say for one to talk , of , of if religion , if it divides people or if it unites . eh i think that it divides more , right . yeah , yes yes and are you catholic ? yes , i 'm catholic , yes oh , and me nothing , no ah nothing and , and the family , your me , catholic , yes aha i do n't go to church much , you know , i 'm very busy busy yes , i do n't have too much time on sundays , and you ? mm yes , i do n't go to church either . and what do you do on sundays ? what , what other NNS do you have ? that has ah , religion no , what , what other things do you have to do on sundays ? oh , true , i , i have , to clean my clothes , clean my house ah , and a lot yes , sure , a lot , a lot of work , look , and what 's your NN 's name ? my NN , is , he is yesterday ah and you ? no i do n't have any grandchildren no not yet oh , do you have a husband ? no , no , i do n't have one i 'm divorced . oh , so you live on your own . yes oh that 's good , right . well , it has it 's good parts and it 's bad parts , and , and you ? no , i like with my husband , but now he is ah , he 's going to work ah yes , he , he works at night ah yes at two a . m . , for NN , eight . from two to eight aha from two in the morning no , no eight in the morning and twelve , today , no , you know you know , today , so , he went , he went to work . ah , he starts working at eight at night . so , no , EX twelve ah he starts to work at twelve at night . and how early does he have to go ? yes because it 's only nine yes but the NNS do n't come , they finish at maybe ten the train NNS . yes aye how horrible , and how far does he go to work ? yes , wait , wait a moment NNP i 'll call you right back ok by , ok that was my daughter . ah yes she 's a lawyer . yes , i can imagine , mhm oh , that 's not good because she has a , a son and he 's already two years old , so , it 's too much for her . yeah , yes very , very very , very long time . yes , yes , yes , yes aha but that is not good for women when you have girls and boys you know mhm , mhm you know to work so much , so yes , i went and then she has to take care of her house . well it 's , it 's difficult in new york . yes , yes , this is true . and how , how , you have cats and dogs , nothing ? no , i do n't have animals . no , i do n't . and you ? aha the , how do you say the , ah , NNS and , they have VBN aha , hmm , VBP so i have , how , how do you say ? NN is called NN . NNP , and so i have , a , NN , NN , NNP yes , i have NNS with dogs and ah cats , i ca n't for me aye what a shame , ah NN NN shame it 's a shame that you have that NN . look they told me that the bronx was eh changing a bit that eh , according to NNP everything was too expensive that , oh yeah more people with more money is going to the bronx . is that true ? yes , people that have money live in manhattan yes , but they had told me , that , that according to manhattan it was too expensive . that there are people going , with money going to the bronx and buying in the bronx . mm you know many people are poor in the bronx . mm you know mhm , mhm so , and many , many people in the bronx too ah , yes many people . oh yes oh , yes it 's a very big problem . yes , and you , in , in philadelphia does n't have to many people right ? yes of , of crime look in , in i live in the outskirts and here it 's a very safe place . that , that here really there 's no crime , where i live yes , ah , am , in the JJ city in , in philadelphia oh philadelphia , yes because i 'm outside oh and you good afternoon , my name is NNP from connecticut . how are you , i from miami . i spoke to you before , or not ? i think so . how are you ? fine , thanks and you ? fine so listen , is that , is religion . yes , what religion are you ? christian . oh , christian . and you ? i 'm catholic . so you are the one who has the husband who is also in the religion , right ? yes aha yes so but , we have n't both VBN this topic yet , right ? yes well we 've VBN a lot because i think that you have , you have a NN too aha , aha , hmmm who was born recently , and yeah so well , let 's keep talking here , let 's see well so eh , eh well , what do you think about religion ? well , i find that it depends on the religion , sometimes it divides , and sometimes not . i visit all the churches , and where they invite me i go , hmmm i do n't VB anyone , their religion , but i do n't like fanatics either , who , who know you and try to , to put all the religion through their eyes , i do n't like it hmmm because i think that each person is free to think , and , and decides like an adult . hmmm but i 've visited a lot of the JJ church , hmmm and they 've brought service to the house of what they call , like an NN , those NN NNS that they do . hmmm but i 've participated a lot , because my aunt and my cousin 's husband , they both belong to the JJ church . that 's good . well , and also , ah ? but , no , tell me no , i was going to say that also , eh , the jews are the base of the christian religion . hmmm and that i , you know , many times it 's not JJ i do n't know what i was going to say , i forgot , but , no but , like you think that , that the jewish religion , because i , i do n't find , like , i find that i , they respect their days , they are very , i think that very like very organized , i would say . you know hmmm but to everyone , religion always divides , because not everyone has the same concept , i think . hello ? the truth it seems like another call is coming in , but they can wait . oh okay , it must be my daughter calling me , but it 's ok . what a shame that she would call me right now . aha , so and well i think that , that religion divides and NNS at the same time . if you have , you know , the same idea or you know , it 's the same religion , of course it will VB , but because they 're , you know , two completely different ways of thinking . let 's say , what you say , RB , JJ . i do n't have any ah eh , NN . i 'm only christian . hm mm because i do n't think that the belief is the same , right . you guys wear NN , and dance and all that , or not ? you know , we talk about the bible , no , no . we also sing the , the songs well a touch yes , and you know , things like that , but is not anything hm mm eh , we do n't dance or any of that . you know , but oh , you can wear NN ? yes , is not , is none of that . yes , because the , the NNP one is that they do n't even cut their hair , and ah , well i do n't know yes i do n't know , the the NNS do n't cut their hair and they are not supposed to wear NN , nor use too much NN . hm mm sundays singing the songs and and , listening to the bible , learning what the bible says how it lives in our life . that is basically the , the the concept , aha . oh , ok . right , right , no , because i thought that , when you said christian you know , none of that . but , uh , despite that , nothing , none of that , you know right if i want to go to dance uh um . but in , you know , right , right look , they have , lets say , a family party , you can go to it , and it 's not yes , yes . do you follow ? , so , after all that everyone else is a NN , but they do n't see that they VBD first not me , we are not like that . we believe that , you know , even when i go to church , and all that stuff , and that , i am still a NN . aha and because i am human , i´m not perfect . but at the same time , if i am with a person that believes , lets say , that she must not cut the hair , or wear NN , or only VBZ NNS , lets say i am invited to a party by them , or something , then i try to , to to go yes , in the conditions , exactly . hmmm and to respect their , their aha , yes , yes , when i go to the , i go to the i have visited the church , my NNS church , and i well , when i go to their place , well yes i use a NN , my , my NN under the NNS , because they don´t use it other way . that is their theory . understand it aha rules and many things that they have to do , before coming to the church . and i think one must go to the church , like you always are . right , right . ¿do you understand or not ? yes , because i remember some time when , i remember , yes , an NN from a church , so one of the ladies told me , no , but you you ca n't dress like that , because that is an NN to the NN , you coming with clothes , and , well , i always wear pants , and NNS , and i wear a watch . uh um . well , and that 's what i mean , because i also think , my opinion is that a lot of people , like they do n't exactly understand what the bible says , because that was VBN , and in yes . so , i think that when people these days goes , saying all that , no make up , no clothes and stuff like that , they forget where it was , you know , where everything started . good afternoon , my name is gloria . i am norma , from atlanta , georgia , where are you from ? oh , how are you ? again we find ourselves , we are , we are the only ones who speak at this time yes , i guess , on that we had to talk because i did not understand that this man said . good , i have to talk about religion . yes , JJ religions , that religions VBD , that is your opinion of homosexuality . from homosexual ? or the a man with a man , is that what you 're saying ? yes . oh , okay . i did not understand . i did not understand , nothing i said , nothing . yes , that would be ideal , it will be impossible . is impossible , is ridiculous . because everybody you know , one is raised differently . you know . ay , i , do they call you every day ? yes , most of the time , when i 'm home , here always , they call , and i answer . yes ? ah , i , today was the only one i got . yesterday they called me and i did n't get it . and the day before yesterday because , from here that i run to the room , so , anyway , i 'm catholic . then , i now , ah , eh like in fifteen minutes i 'm taking my kid to a youth NN and he VBZ , yes , exactly . but he does n't understand that . he thinks that that , he 's a teenager , sure . yes , yes , yes yes , i figure so , i want him to be , to have even a little bit of , you know , because i yes , it 's always nice , right ? he , has always gone to church and now he does not , and he fight about it , we are always fighting to go to church i go alone , because if we are going to fight then is NN of course to take him i mean , always ask him , they would listen , but know , they are in a NN time yes so , that 's a bit difficult , but , they always listen , and always talk to him , not about church , but about the relation with god , and that 's really important yes , yes that way he would always have a spiritual base , right ? yes , exactly of course , because in the moment they would need to go trough a suffer , a NN , you always come back to the JJ being yes no matter what NN , any religion yes you always go back and look for the only one that can help exactly , that exactly , i say that you should not get to that point , you should pray everyday yeah you know , uhm , giving him the time you need for him on sunday , we go to church on sundays hm mm giving him an hour , no , he always has to be running , you want from church , and he doesn´t want to go , and we have NNS , and everyone tells me , allow him not to go , and i say yes , he has to go , forget about it . i can talk to everyone and they tell me , no , you´re doing it wrong because you go with him , and you´re both fighting , what good are you getting from going to church yes , i mean , just VB it . i mean , don´t force him a lot , because if you force him VB get more JJ yes , yes , that´s NNS happening . NNP getting it´s true , they go to the mall and i don´t like them going to the mall yeah you know , a lot of this boys , their mothers let them go to the mall alone , but i won´t let him go yeah but i tell him , if you find a boy of the same religion , then you can go NN , or NN , but JJS see where , where where we end up tonight yes , that´s right . it´s a little difficult VBG with children , no ? when they grow up , they want to go their own way , their yes . to guide them , right . hm mm . my oldest was the same . oh yeah ? yes he calls me when he has a problem , yes pray , that 's why , you always have to be in good NN with god hm mm so like that you do n't have to call anyone to , hm mm . to pray for you . if you are VBG yourself . you know . ah aha , aha . aha , aha . so then , i buy it ? because if you do n't have hm mm if you do n't have a god , your life is JJ , hm mm exactly , that 's so right , so right . that 's what i told him , but he said , do you know what he said the other day ? he said , where was god when i went through this and i told him that that was supposed to happen so he 'd learn , oh , when , let me tell you , the dog , a dog was ran over where was god when , VBP NN and i , the dog lived but he told me , oh yes , there 's a god , because we VBP for that dog , that was ran over by a car , and , and aha . sure , they do understand , no , understand hm mm . right ? and they learn , so if you go on being religious , if you attend church an have NN , he 'll follow aha , aha your good example . sure , because , i mean , not everything , anyway , children learn from their parents , no , the parents are the first teachers hm mm so , he , he , he sometimes , when we go to church , he fall asleep , it 's so JJ , oh my god . hm mm the music puts him to sleep . i do n't know what gets him NN . the singing that gets him NN . and it 's an NN because we ca n't sit in the front , we can sit in the back and he but do n't they have youth programs in your religion ? there , in the church ? no , i think they have , but when you go to mass , the , the mass , the father VBZ about what he wants . ah , yes , yes , aha . hm mm but it 's at nine in the morning . he 's not going to want to go to church so early . he likes to sleep . so we go at twelve . of course , aha . for him to feel more interested , find friends , because if you really want to be in a NN , you must have friends , do n't you ? yes , yes , yes , yes , yes in a group you need to find friends , who share your ideas , your interests , this is how you VBP up exactly , yes . that 's why i want him to go tonight , because it 's a group of young people yes hm mm but then he goes like , oh , but i 'll have to work with the elder , i do n't like working with the elder , oh forget it , it 's JJ he just wants to watch tv and play computer games , i oh i am VBN up with that , i 'll VB it off . where you free today ? ah ? today is jewish holiday . you do n't work , do you ? no , i do n't work oh , how good . yes , i work with my sons , here at home . they make me mad sometimes oh , yes , i can imagine , yes i hear them . how old are them ? ah , oh , o . NNP . anyways , eh , how many minutes do we have ? my NN is RB now , you talk . ah , and i feel bad because we know that god does not accept that . yes . one has to have one , one in the family , so you can tell , you know , how he was raised and all that . we knew since he was very little . and now he is confused and now he does n't want to go to church cause of what they say , but i found a church that VBZ them . yes . sure . ah , yes . yes , it 's a real NN , because there are people like yes . aha . really , it 's , well us in the church we believe in the law of karma , the reaction that you 're paying for activities lived out in the previous life . so , for this , but , really , you have your relationship with god , and you should VB it , yes , like , it does n't matter in what way . no ? aha . because the important things is , is n't the NN of your body , the yeah what 's important is the spiritual soul that you have , not the yes , yes , exactly . no , and their NN , that 's , that 's very important , ¿right ? uh um . right , and now , this body is an JJ cover , that you VBP act according to the JJ cover because you are VBN right , right . but , you have to , i do n't know , VB the material NN , ¿right ? , and look , a more JJ NN in your relationship with god . right , many times it 's not easy , but there 's always a process you can control , right , you can control rules and NNS . that 's what i tell him . i tell him , `` open your bible '' , then , he says `` uh , but nobody wants me in church '' , these and that . . . uh um . hm mm every day , poor boy does not know to ask . good hello hello my , my name is gloria . how are you ? good my name is NNP hi hi i gave you where are you ? i live in new york oh , i 'm in nebraska oh nebraska , my mother is there . yeah so , we have to talk about religion . and do you find it difficult sometimes to understand what the machine is saying ? i did n't understand anything that he said , but i talked to another lady before this , and it was about religion and , how do you think religion is VBG homosexuals ? if you 're against it ? something like that about religion . aha because i was listening but i really did n't understand anything he was saying , aha . really , we should call that man and tell him , that they should put someone who speaks spanish . yes because that one sounds really bad . i know so are you catholic or what religion are you ? yes i 'm catholic , aha catholic , oh , me too . i think so too . yes , yes aha , i think that , well one ca n't just . like if something bad happens in their life , like a man with a woman . aha but i really do n't understand , so . how can i understand ? if i 'm not like that . that i do not understand . i also knew a boy , mhm he was a homosexual aha and he also had many married men , yes and i really do not understand . no i do n't know aha , it is an ugly thing but it happens a bunch because the other day NNP had a program with many cute boys . aha . aha . wow , it 's horrible , it 's horrible , but you know . aha although you want to be this , he 'll help you . if it 's like this that you have to live , he will find your peace and your NN . aha since my dad does n't know , his grandfather does n't know . aha so , you know , but at times he sees girls and he likes girls too so , i do n't understand . i get it . i know , i know that he VBD to be with a guy because he did n't like how , to feel something JJ , he wanted to feel something hard . yes , aha but he only had a girlfriend because , what he really wanted was n't normal . yes only that he did n't let me know , she was VBN . aha you know , from other , from the other kids . aha , mhm and you know , he is a good guy , what it hurts is that he is so good . and , and he appeared to complete , you know , yes , are you latin or american ? i 'm not we i have a mexican mother and french father ah so well i am both ah , which parent is which ? my mom is NNP . aha and my dad is french . what does that mean ? well my father is is white , he 's from here . and my JJ yes , and my mom is a mexican from mexico . yes i was born , born here . aha , so it is , and while there 's a lot of people , there are n't many people here who speak spanish . yes , yes , it 's very cold today . oh my god yes . i do n't know , you tell me . do you think that homosexuals are christians ? aha he tries , because we are catholics , super catholics . and sometimes , he VBZ with other men in the internet , NN , NN , NN , NN . aha and , i tell him , keep reading your bible . that , eventually , you are not going to be wanting to be in the internet . aha that , he wants him to come to his door , or help him feel better , VB the NN that you have in your mind . but , he becomes desperate , he does n't want to wait . but what the , well what has me confused , is that in the bible it says that a relationship is between a woman , aha and a man , i know , i know , i know . and a man . and that , ah , that says the complete opposite of what the bible says . well , yes is true . a NN and all that , aha that , that he , he VBP her for all her NNS . if he VBP her , he VBZ my son . aha you know , i do n't know because i do n't know many people like that , is a shame . aha you never know when their NN is a big one . being different of the common . and you know , you have to hide , you never now , and sometimes they get all over aha ah but here were we used to live , my husband and i aha but put it like that , i do not look like a mexican , if you know what i mean aha , and you are a dark mexican or white mexican white because there are whites that do not have color FW NN does not exist as a word so i have no NN what he means about that NN i 'm white but because i have brown eyes and hair too aha aha but my husband is well brown and so they say the 's the JJ mexican around here . oh , okay he is one of those people that can get along with everyone , and if he does n't like someone with everyone , yes hello . hi , from texas i 'm manuel from chicago okay , we are getting connected everyday now i think , i think there is n't no one more in the study , right ? it seems like , do you have to wait a lot ? no , the phone VBD oh , really ? , because they called me and i waited a little bit , they could n't connect me with someone else , so i called . and always a call they connect me with you mmm , weird i think there is no one else yes , everybody left , i talked to a lady , she told me that she already had like CD calls yes yes from where ? that , she VBD CD calls of the study no , i mean , where was she from ? oh , new york , yes oh , i talked to her like two days ago yes ah i spoke to VB from nebraska aha eh , ah , you got to talk to her , when when i talked about , well . and she calls me manuel . how funny . ah , yes . i told you she 's my sister in law yes , yes , i remember yes ah , ah , i , yes , i , i i 've told a couple of friends to get into the study but i have n't gotten to talk to them , yes no . oh , they are already in the study ah , yes they 're already in it . when they had two hundred people that were in the study was that it was better . in other words you have to wait less time , to be connected . well , no i 've just talked to you with NNP and with another person from colorado . ah , yes only the first call i did was from colorado . a NN from colorado . yes , then later it was with you . then with NNP , another time with you , another time with you . oh , that 's good , uh , ¿and what do you want to tell me about religion now ? oh , oh , let 's see what we talked about yesterday , we talked about religion a little bit yes , a little bit i do n't even remember what . but uh , i do n't know , what can i tell you about religion . . . i can tell you about my mom , for example , my mom is and i was like , oh , my sister was in high school , and then my mom wanted us to go with her to that church , and no way were we going with her there to that church , because it was too JJ and we were very little . to , i mean , and we were teenagers , no way we were going to stop VBG pants or stop VBG our hair uh , right yeah , and then uh , the church was very weird , they uh , they would go in and start moving everywhere and and speaking in , or they said things , and they said that they were speaking NNS , and that these NNS they got into , that that was part of of the NNP spirit that god that was inside them and they did those things and my mom was on that church oh , like seven or eight years . ah , what is your religion ? i do n't have a religion . not now you do n't have a preference for any one . no , but ah , when i was growing up , since my mom got into that religion that was so strict and she wanted us to go with her ah , we then decided to go to the NNP church it was n't , they did n't have those rules like that . but when my mom got into that religion , she also got to believe that catholics don't eh , catholics were wrong , and like the catholic church , ah , ah ah , you know they have ah , they give much NN to the virgin mary and the , they other , they churches yea , NN do n't , do n't do n't , pray to the virgin mary , nor believe in the virgin mary ah , well , in in fact in the catholic , they have NNS even for NNS . mhm but i wo n't reach the point in which they pray to the NN here , they pray to that NN over there and yes ah , each one , no ? hmm there are people who are VBN because i spoke badly about a NN or something , whatever thing hmm i , i do n't get VBN , it does n't bother me that they talk , everyone can talk and say what they want , and it does n't VB me , i 'm saying other people are VBN , or the religion yes , yes ah , but i think that , either the person is bothered it 's something i think that , i mean , i think that religions are good , eh and , i think that , i do n't know , it 's important when one is growing up , the people for , for teenagers and for kids it 's good for them to go to church to learn about other , other people from the same state . i always say there are bad people in the church but there 's , uh , a great many kids and young people in the churches . who have good ideas , and now they give classes for young people , to keep them busy and not walk the streets . mh they try to keep them busy , from an early age , kids , teaching them , ah , i 've seen that they attend lots of courses , they take them camping and lots of things like that . yes , no , i think it 's good , and , i , i mean , it 's like , a social structure , they are a community and i think that , that , that eh , when you move somewhere else , for example , it 's okay because you get to meet new friends . in spanish , for example , then you get to meet lots of people that speak spanish and you can easily make new friends , i believe that , in that sense , religion is good , right ? i see , in a way , in a social way . the problem is when people , like yesterday , they start thinking that their religion is the only one but , i , i went to the NNP church for many years , that was when i was in the university , when i had just started the university in NNP and , and , it was something good for me , i got to meet lots of young people that liked to take part in activities , good activities they would n't do bad things , i also had contact with , when you are in school , you meet people that do wrong stuff . many could mm no , i said that is good . uhm it is good that once you are older you can do the things you like and the thing you didn´t like now nobody is telling you what to do . if you are older and you still go to church you know what you are doing . it always needs to be like that . well , i do not have children and when i have them i don´t know how would i be ? oh , are you married ? no , i am not married . some religions are worse than others . ah , yeah and they do n't , do n't provide information so that you make JJ , decisions , you have a JJ mind and you make the decision that you think is correct . good evening . i 'm joe . yes . and i 'm carmen from chicago . the chicago . how are you carmen ? good . and you ? yes , a while back . you are the father of the girl , right ? yes . yes , what a memory wow how is everything going over there , good ? good , thanks a little cold here . yes yes here too it 's getting cold also . we are having tomorrow already there 's another cold front coming and we are going to have NNS , it 's going to snow . so ah , how much ? to sixty . yes , there , and is the wind strong over there and all that ? yes , yes yes . over there it always VBZ hard , right ? uh ? the wind is more strong there than in other places . yes . yes . i do n't like that . do you know today 's subject ? the NNS , they can work together . uh uh . all those things , what do you think about that ? well , in my opinion religion is good but not so good and not so bad for society . there should n't um but some people in my family are christians . one of my uncle he 's kind of sick because he 's so , so religious . to make them join the church , he tells them that god is going to forgive them , when i go to puerto rico , that 's the first thing he says to me yes . seven days a week uh huh . oh . but . but i have a lot of family from different religions . i have a lot of family who are jehovah 's NNS . you think it 's bad that they go to read the word of god ? yes , you 're catholic , you tell them , i 'm catholic so they wo n't come back to bother you ever again . uh huh . my dad taught me since when i was little , i remember my dad always had us VB by the bed , everyone all around the bed , VBG to pray and my dad always told us , you do n't need to go sundays , sunday in the morning , or sunday at NN , or sunday at night . but , there are some people who do n't , who need to be stuck in church . ah , to the power . and how do you see this , for example , with the world situation and the religious influences in the government and political decisions ? for for this reason there is a lot , there is i , well of war in the middle east that is happening because of religion . uh um that , they have used it as a JJ guide to do things . for example , this iraq war in every way , to fight them , so there , of course the muslims think that god , NNP , is with them , is VBG them . and like that , uh , there is a lot , and the jewish too , in they way of VBG they also think that . but , i always think about a thing the bible says , that you will know people by their fruit , the ones in god 's side how they practice . religion is really , the belief of the true NN , because if they do n't practice it , like god and his son taught us , well yes even if they didn´t have the NNS they hurt close to them yes but VBZ the sense of changing them to another church if in the other church NN find more children exactly and that´s not right i mean , here in colorado , uhm , a priest actually died hmm but many of this NN NNS have come forward and they´re VBG the church because uh uh because he got his way for many years . and now , after he died , it seems like someone decided to take the NN and JJ hmm that´s very JJ and i don´t think god will feel a lot of NN for people like that uh uh . especially one who VBZ children . exactly . the people from other races said the virgin was theirs but not for me , because i am puerto rican yes . yes and very fast , um they send them for three dollars but was full . and i don´t know if you hear about the ah uh ah , the face of the NNP virgin that appeared in one of those like JJ NNS and that . and it was sold for millions at NNP , millions of dollars . but those people are RB . then the , NNP virgin that appeared here in chicago it was under an express it was an oil NN , NN that was coming down and there the NNP virgin was VBN mm . they were bothering the people who were driving by . and there was the virgin oh and it was VBN every night , every night . but one , one came , a puerto rican came who did n't believe in that , and said it was a lie my aunt , since he does n't believe in that because he is christian mm he said , god forgive , that that was NN , VBG in the virgin . i also have a friend were i used to work uh uh she always said , mm , carmen see you tomorrow god willing , uh uh , god willing , the virgin willing , already i did n't VB to tell her the virgin willing because she did n't believe in the virgin . and i told her and what has brought her to the top ? yes , the puerto rican call it the virgin mary , what other name did others give her ? the ones from here . uh uh . NNP for the mexicans . but there were more mexicans and they mention the virgin of NNP in chicago there are many mexicans uh , many . and many of them are NNS . and , is that the majority of latinos in the united states ? because the church gets full of mexicans . what puerto ricans ? yes , we live here in colorado . the majority of hispanics here are less . hello ? ah , hello , what 's your name ? annie annie , hello , i 'm pilar . hi , pilar are your from miami ? yes . right , we had already talked the other time . in fact , did n't we talk yesterday of ? of religion ? was it yesterday ? or the day before ? okay , i do n't remember . but , well . i do n't remember that it was with you , how are you ? em , i have n't heard you , what did you say , what did you say ? ah ? that how are you ? ah . ah , fine , fine . and you ? fine . well , nothing . talking about the topic of , of religion . um , again , or if , or if you have another topic to talk about . yes , if you want to talk how is your life , that 's fine too well , few things have happened in my life yes i 'm kind of bad today . i 've a little of , i 'm sick . so , i was VBG all day and watching tv , so are you an student ? , or are you working ? i 'm a student , yes what are you VBG ? engineering , JJ engineering wow , are you calling from pennsylvania ? no , from new york okay , new york mmm okay and you ? how much do you have left ? are you VBG ? yes well , i just started the NNP , so i have a lot left wow and what do you do ? , are you working ? no , i 'm home , now , with my daughter who 's twenty two months old . ah really ? i 'm expecting the next one , eh , any day now . ah really ? man , in good time . so , i 'm a little uncomfortable i 'm dying to have the baby . but , and is the next one a boy ? i do n't know , do n't know . oh you do n't know ? so , we want to wait to , just a minute , my love , go , go to your room to play . we want to wait until we have the baby , to know , you know , what it 's going to be yes ? because i told my , my husband , that with my luck , that they will probably tell us that it will be , let 's say , a boy , a girl , and comes out , the opposite . aha . or what , it already happened with i told him . with , the girl ? you have a girl now . we also , also did n't find out with her , either . ah . i did n't want to know because i , i would like to have another girl , but if god gives me a boy , i 'm happy with that . of course . but , i think that if i try to , to know before the the baby is born , it could be that i 'm not too happy , so i 'll better wait . yes , that 's why . that 's why , that 's why , i , better prefer to wait , and that way i know that i 'm not going to have , you know , because , i have many friends that say , ah , i want a boy , a girl , and , and then , they try to see , before the baby is born , yes , and then they are JJ and JJ yes , and i do n't want to do that , i want to be happy with my baby . and the , and the clothes and that , the , if i ? well , that 's a problem . if it 's a boy , here they have , eh , i do n't know how to say it in spanish , but it 's the stores that , that sell clothes that are already used . aha , so , what , our plan is , it 's to take the girl 's clothes , yes . aha , take the credit . then there , start NN clothes for boys . mhm . no really ? nothing will happen , the child is not going to turn into no , it 's just that , he does have clothes to wear , that 's the important thing . well , you do n't need to be warm here , it 's always hot . it 's like , you know , i believe that it 's just , i believe that they are , there are fifteen to twenty days per year when we have , lets say really ? to wear a NN or long NNS , whatever . you know , it 's a bit fresh , not so humid but it 's nothing like , to wear a NN , it 's not cold or i 'm so jealous , hey . we have both here , extreme hot days during the summer and terrible cold during the NNS . sure , and besides that , being pregnant , you feel the NN , right ? yes , but , yet , you know , eh , i , i think that too but when the girl is all JJ , you know , so , i think it 's not only me who feels the NN . mm , yes , and , are you afraid of giving birth or are you ready now , after your first child ? eh , no , the first one , eh , he was born through a JJ section . yes it was an emergency . it scares me , i do n't think much about it . i think that , you know , my body knows what he is doing , i know it 's going to hurt because , when you had the NN VBD , did they . . did they put you out ? of course , they have to put you out yes ? they had to try like seven times before they did it right oh and afterwards , they gave me NN when they finished . that VBD me . i was like NN two and a half days with , eh , with NNS and NN because , we did n't wanted to give her VBG JJ mmm i wanted to VB VBG her yes and sometimes , here , at hospitals do n't let no , you 're right , so , he was with her so they know that she was n't getting VB or anything mmm yes , but , you know , was an experience , and if god wants , we will have that experience one more time no , sure you VBP , now you will have a totally different one , but , if this time , in a natural way , i think is an JJ experience . for what i 've hear , IN , i oh , how good and i am already thinking if there are possibilities . to start a family . the problem is that since i am a student , well , it 's hard no , people , i mean , it 's always hard when , for a woman , when you work . you never know what comes next , if , if you 'll get VBN at work , of you wo n't be able to continue but , yes , a student getting paid for , that 's how it works here , they give you a scholarship , some money yes but , they expect NNS . it 's like a job , basically yes but you have less rights . you do n't have as much rights as like for instance , the right to vacations , JJ , i do n't know how is it in spanish , yes you do n't have all that , eh , here . so , i do n't know if it will be possible . but i would like to , because i do n't want i do n't want to wait that much . i think the right age for having the kids is twenty some , do n't you ? well , we did n't VB well , we did n't know we could have VBN so , eh , we are already married , it 's thirteen to fourteen mhm twelve or thirteen , i do n't remember now . but , eh , two weeks after we bought the house i got pregnant . of course i did n't get pregnant , i was already four months pregnant what ? ah , you were four months pregnant and you had n't noticed no , because i thought it was just stress , stress because of the moving , because of buying the house oh you know . since , NN we thought , we had been told by the doctors that we could not have children , so . i never VBP oh , really ? and how ? look , they were wrong , thank goodness yes , so and how did you finally notice ? eh , because i have a medical NN that causes me a big pain . what happened is that i was feeling a great pain . and i was thinking that it was coming back oh because i 've had a lot of , eh , i 've had four NNS mhm i 've had plenty of problems yes and , that 's why i had that much pain and was it the reason , was it the reason for the NN also ? no , the NN was due to , honestly , because the doctor did n't want to wait oh , e he , he , my husband hear him telling the , the , i do n't know how is it in spanish , oh , yes , me either , VBP i think , aha mm , ok , that he did n't want to , mm , that he was scared that we would give him , eh , we would , mm , , , a NN yes eh , because i was , i did n't have , wait , leave me alone , wait a second . i was , supposedly , they said i was of JJ two weeks mhm forty one weeks hello ? hi hello ? good . . . good afternoon , this is josefina hello , how are you ? fine , thank you . where are you ? i am in my NN right now your NN . oh , how cool , in the university . oh , how cool . what do you study ? eh . . history i am here in philadelphia as well . eh . . have you been long time , eh , receiving calls with the plan ? with the program ? oh , thank you very much that university is very JJ . very , how you say it . . , JJ , VB it ? oh . . . oh . ah , yes , of course , and yes , little by little , right ? yeah , so , how about it ? well , the subject , i do n't know what you think of it , if . . . the recording . it said something about religion , about if it is the division , if it is that religion divides or if it actually yeah . . . that is the subject . . . am i correct ? i yes , yes , yes , exactly , that is what i understood as well , and that it is very good that you 've had experience with different areas of religion or a different religion , i guess , or people of , of other religions , right ?