Sure
Um, i don't know
It's ok, it's OK
Well, the thing is that it was good too, but i don't know why he decided like that
Yes, sometimes when you don't know universities well
Yes, besides, well, he signed up from Argentina, i don't know how he did that
Sure, sure, sure, yeah, you don't have a clue, you go where you think it's best
Yes, yes, yes, but well,
Well, ¿and is everything OK with you?
Everything's fine, everything's fine, yeah
¿Work?
Oh, ¿is there any novelties around Baltimore?
No, walking a little bit, no, everything calm, the truth is I don't have, I don't have a lot, just these days, like I finished doing everything I need to do
Very good.
so, for now, so, since I'm half
With this, did something happen with the truck?
no, no because you know that the cars parked there, two blocks
Sorry?
it keeps being parked in the same place.
With the same crash?
yes.
Look at that.
It doesn't have the ticket you see, the ticket that the police left it doesn't have more
yes.
so I imagine that someone has taken it but no, they don't move it or anything, I don't know.  I went to look for the report and everything
eh, and called those who needed to come, and all the options, and everything, but no, it came back the same money that if we had to return it
so, nothing more happened.
That's good, to eat.  yes.  And well, so everything's good.
Uh, you have to eat, what are you doing now?
No, no, no, I called because yes, it takes him fifteen minutes to come here.
That's good.
No, the little onion is already getting black, so it's time to put it.  The pierogis on the, the casserole.
In the pot
In the pot
Dude, ¿and are you not going to see Juan this weekend?
No, i don't think so
And, uh, oh
No, the weather's crappy. It, we're only telling Martin yes to mess with him
¿Did you told him yes?, i haven't asked him yet
Yes, yes, well, tell him, tell him you spoke to me and that we're going
¿Why are you mean to Martin?
Tell him, "oh, I'm sotty, i can't...", tell him, "oh, it's a shame i won't see him because they leave, they leave on Friday  morning and"
Tell him that, and i won't see him
¿Why are you so mean?
Oh, I'm like that, don't complain
Oh, that's sweet, i want to
Really good, yesterday was, yesterday was
I miss the
exceptionally good, huh
Yeah?, ¿the usual?
Exceptionally good, the usual, even more, i said "let's not order", so, oh, at Japollo, because Sole is there
And, and there was no agreement, we all ordered at Japollo's, i mean, we ordered at Japollo's
It's just it's good at Japollo
Even without Sole being there
Very well, very well, it's OK
I saod, well, i don't know, it's something that Sole eats, but no, it seems everyone liked Japollo's
It's very tasty
Yeah, but yesterday
I liked it very much
I went there and it was delicious
Oh, ¿did you ask for it?, i think you didn't ask for that anymore
Delicious, ¿the squid?, yeah
That's what, uh, at the hot peppers
No, not the ones from hot pepper, no, not the ones from hot pepper because there were less people there
Yes, but
They're very good
And... but they have those really spicy things
Very noble, at least it's equally noble
it cleanses you, it cleanses your whole
yeah, that, ¿you know what?, if you have any sin, it removes it
Is that true?, that if you eat something spicy, like if you have something
Frightened
I won't ask you, oh this thing that I'm asking is so stupid but I don't know
yes.
If you eat something spicy or hot, does it clean your system from some types of, I don't know how to explain it
No.
No, it has nothing to do with it.
No, what do I know, I don't.
And why does people
yes but, no.
Oh.
I don't know, which question.
It's all right.
I have no idea, lets see, do you move there
How is Caro?
Oh, she's saying hi to you Caro
Oh well, send her one.
yes, she says, she says it's a shame that we can't see each other, how are we
That's silly.
go skying
When are you leaving, then, but you still have to, you have to, what's the name, use your new skates?
yes, what do I know, you see? I don't know, I don't know, we'll see how much
Do you own skying clothes?
four minutes, five minutes. Sure. Four minutes. I give orders from here, from my phone. Well, it's always a good thing
Don't you have a timer in your kitchen?
yes yes, we did, I gave her orders so that she would
Oh.
It's very important for me to give the orders, otherwise, nobody would do it.
yes.
and that's a shame.
It gets out of control.
It's sad, as they say it.
So, you like to give orders.
No, I don't like to, it's not like I like to give orders but if I don't do it
How?
here, here, they would all do as they wish, it'll be a mess, a real mess.
How is your sister?
You really have to control her because she
Why? She's nice.
she misbehaves, she misbehaves.
She does? And well
She misbehaves, a lot, she does things that she shouldn't do.
¿What are you gonna do about it?, nice people sometimes behave badly
I, in the ass so it will behave
It likes it there
There, well, uh, ¿how much time do we have left?, no, just finish
I don't know, no, i'm, but, speak, speak, you almost don't talk, baby, you ask me all the questions
And, what, ¿what do you want me to talk about?
What do i know?, send me something, ¿haven't you got anything new to tell?
Well, I'm on the lab today, sure, that Sónica finally finished it's... yes, Grant
Oh
And, and just as she finished her grant, she submitted it, and came to the lab to mess with me
Oh, to ask, ¿to ask results?
To interru-. yes, to interrupt, uh, it's something, of our nothing to do [time]
Um
everyday, so, nothing, but well
And what did you tell her?, did you
we have to freeze to death for some particular reason, uh, oh
¿Could you justify that you didn't do anything or how was it?
yes
Hello, good evening
Hello, good evening, my name is Veronica
Hello, how are you, my name is Ever
How are you Ever
And where are you calling from Veronica
Well, the couples, where are you from Ever?
Eh, I am from Guatemala but I am calling from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Ah, I am from Argentina, I am calling from Washington DC
Ah so we are nearby yes
fairly close, we're close, we're close, what can you tell me about couple break-ups, have you had to break up a lot.
Eh, no really, no eh but I believe that if one of the topics that they said was that if you changed your age and I definitely think that while eh
when the person is older well I believe it is easier depending on the relationship, no?
It seems to you that it is easier, I understand that it is harder yes, yes, I believe that the more you mature to be able to think about some things or to be able to
become independent no?  but what do I know thinking about longtime couples that don't function and stay together, I think this is sometimes the story of a family if there are children and other things
it affects you negatively to be able to take a decision to break up a relationship
Well, but when you are talking about already having children, it's not just a couple now we are talking about a marriage
and that is much more distinct well than what I thought the topic was, well I imagined that it was perhaps a boyfriend girlfriend thing or something like that
than a prior relationship let's say or less formal
yes, yes, well if in a marriage well I believe that there are a lot more things to analyze and it is definitely more difficult to break it up, it's not a matter to just say it and well
mhm, she left me know and at some other point well I will meet someone more appropriate for my lifestyle
for your project hmm so, and well What are you doing in Pennsylvania? the breaking of couples is not a topic that, but I am going to make a question to you do you think is more common here
in the United States than in Guatemala also about couples
eh yes it seems to me that it is a lot like because here is like you wait first for people do not get married so soon
secondly they have a lot of relationships when they begin to have a partner when the person is going to get married then
I thin that a breaking there are many breaking in couples of a life, I think that the average age of breaking here
is between twenty eight years old
yes I know but you know that for example in the university campus where I work there are some American girls who are twenty four, twenty three years old
and they are worried about getting marries or finding a partner to get married a thing that caught my attention
yes
yes like I don´t know I don´t I don´t understand because the age is very young I am older no they are very young and you have a thousand of things to think about or make a
and it is like they are not interested in crossing the twenty five years old with a definition I even have a workmate that
that well lets say she is fine in her relationship but almost three years she is twenty five almost three years as a girlfriend and as the boy doesn´t want to get married
she thought to, she is thinking of ending the relationship and find someone who wants a marriage
well eh the truth is that it sounds very
no it catches my attention because if you tell me Argentina I can tell you that if
eh it happened
but here I have an image well but it is that what happens to me not sometimes I have a more liberal image and I live more conservative behaviors
yes for the the truth is not the experience I have had in my case regularly I have seen more liberal people but how is it called definitively is going to be everything right?
eh but eh when it comes about your friend I think she has the reason because I think if she has been with a boy for three years and is twenty five years old and there are not plans to
a marriage
just formalize then eh well yes I think that in your case perhaps I would do the same
are you in a couple?
yes I'm married
you're married, has it been many years?
it's been five years
it's been five years, do you have kids?
yes I have one who's two years old
and is hard thinking in breaking up well sure is that, is hard right thinking of breaking up  and there being kids in the middle
oh yes quite hard because not only not only you think of yourself but also think of them right? you're thinking in
in the style of life they would have in the in how hard it would be for them because they are used since babies right? of being with the father and the mother and suddenly
eh they are not together eh then besides that they are separated eh the lifestyle as far as the economic also becomes harder for
sure
for the kid right? and then I think that there are many factors that should be taken into account
mm yes that's true
are you married?
that's true although I see many of my students eh undergraduate of the university working on some family issue and also
I tell you at least eighty percent are from parents that are not together no, that are separated
yes
and then like in reality that really grabs my attention right seeing twenty four, twenty five year old with this of yes yes I want to get married
and then the other face right a seventeen, eighteen year old that lives with one of the parents
yes and haven't you noticed which of them are affected, I have heard that they struggle with it more when they are kids and not babies
when the kids have around ten years or more and the parents get divorced
mhm
when they are three or four years the parents get divorced I think
when they are teenagers
yes I believe that when they are teenagers they struggle a lot because they can't move on, but, when they are babies, they accept it
yes, it's like when they have a style and then a different family structure, lets say, so they don't miss it, they don't miss that image of their old family
or they don't long for that old family, I think
yes
oh, I don't know, the memory of it, what do I know!
sure, so, I hope, my advice would be to do it quickly, right?
sure, well I too have, for example, two of my mates, no, I'm thirty five years old and the parents got divorced when they were already adults
but my friend of all time, she's from Puerto Rico and she's separating and she's like this should have happened long ago.
and they value the efforts of their parents to have kept the family and home structure, sure
and probably later on, that the reason why they stayed together or at least, I think it's quite common, they stay together because they are waiting for the kids to
to reach a certain age in which they will go to university or about to leave the family home and
so, they decide to divorce then when it won't really affect them
sure
I don't know if your friend is in that case but
I think so, yes, yes, yes, they are all adults and well, it's like it'll still have some impact, I mean, it still
lots of questions and above all, my friend married and her partner changed her a lot
sure, sure
so, she is married, she still doesn't have children but, she kind of questioned her own relationship, the way it affected her, I believe that it does affect the experience that you are having and what you were saying
that the hardest thing has to do with the role-models right, the parents at that time
yes yes
I don't know
hey, and what university, in which  university do you work or study?
I'm in the University of Maryland
oh yes, I graduated there!
you graduated here?
yes, in two thousand and three
in which department?
oh I was in biochemistry and in
aha
oh cellular biology
oh look, one of my friends works there, well, I believe that she enrolled in two thousand and three, I forgot
so, but, oh, so you are from this area
yes yes, I was raised in Maryland I came here when I was seven years old and I grew up in Maryland and
and where did you live?
oh, it was close to the university, I used to live in Highs Bill
Oh, where i am, well, I'm in Graduate Hills, what you said, this complex next to the university
Oh, yes, i know where it is, it's the university garden
Oh, the other one that's in university boulevard
Oh, i know which one it is
it's just at the exit of the university, the other is closer
yes, yes, yes
more to the east side, and, ¿what are you doing in Pennsylvania now?
i study medicine, I'm in third year of medicine school
Because once here, medicine is a masters, ¿right¡
yes, it's am major, you have to do a, uh, a master, and sometimes they get one and they finish, and they get to go to med school
sure, sure, yeah, that's different, i don't know how it is in Guatemala, because in Argentina it's three, straight with eighteen years, the medicine career
Yeah, it's the same in Guatemala, what it's seven straight years, here, ¿right?, and
And, ¿is college public in Guatemala?
There are both, there are public and private ones
right, and ¿is the public school prestigious?
Uh, for medicine, i believe that the public has, uh, a better prestige than the private ones, but
the, the same happens in Argentina
But the problem with the public one is that when there are what they call "huelgas", like strikes [accurate translation 'huelga' - strike]
Uh, yes, yes, yes
Uh, they lock down the university indefinitely
