Hi good evening who is this
How are you where are you from
Hello
Oh where there is work And whats your job there
oh yea
really oh yeah i think shes from georgia
¿Who your niece
Why
Why I also like that music exactly music that is positive not music that is negative
¿Youre not allowed to have animals
I see Is you husband from the United States or from Venezuela
Which are these
How
Okay do you have a favorite bands
and what did you give her on her birthday
Whos speaking
did you study or work
Hi eh Todays topic is frankly touching huh
Exactly now I said well its going to be the , memories , I said well , the , memories , are , like precisely the , most important , thing that life can bring you because one lives like of memories right
And they said no girl what is that Look jeez seriously but look the power of TV is
Of course of course and we went here How are you
Uh What else Lets see what else After that I didnt have any . other official boyfriend until S more than yes truly the . experiences that I never had in some manne experience like I dont even know right Thank God
Its impossible then that they maintain a right A situation that way of that ay
your boyfriend because and she said `` well its just that it very its , very , hard , to . me to break up with him '' And told her `` ¿Why `` and she said
And then wow i told her ¿What ¿How can you possible love someone that hits you that hurts you sometimes she came uh bruised or sometimes
We are in the extremes exactly how great And where are you from
Ah ok ok Chilean of course no
thats good where are you from originally
Ah youre uh youre calling every day
and they treat me to speak in Arabic I dont know They , found me . the face most of the Indian or something loke that but sure ¿and there are discrimitation or not
they denied that to you medical attention
Exactly Its a problem its a cycle that works with earnings and it is stronger right
Uh uh Uh uh Well yes look yes
of parents that can not pay
Oh Look that yes I only knew about the and thought , it was , for me And me smaller without getting tired and like that
Mm Im going to crash
maybe they maybe they have I dont know something that can help you in a
yes yes is very simple because in reality well on one side , the , maintenance is , a medicine , that this person that helped with the sample said no man this
here they give us you have no problem No more do you see some community center or something and
Mm
there are a lot of signs And but knowing a little more , about , the , advances , its that I can give . the medicine we think that a stronger diagnosis could improve my sons life with
because it was under control but ultimately now he has , about , two years that it has been uncontrolled It has been under control
And well He gives it to me gives it to , me , yes , yes , they , gave , him , another , They , increased , its , effectiveness ? and he got sick and then Well either way he had to stop and go back to the basics
yes yes then its that now you know its a question of experimenting
Well yes sometimes yes
Always yes
life even though you dont say its always unsettled all the time
Mm
It happens in school and then he feels really bad
Yes yes its a stigma Its a stigma What he has no so
seventeen
Per se well getting back to the theme I believe that there should be some good ones here
system of uh
From the doctors A the medical centers where there are schools of medicine
Mm
Mm Yes
reasonable Something that youll well be able uh to do Sometimes they dont charge anything
Uh uh
and I a few years ago thought that I had it but , in , the , end , I went and since , I , had diagnosed , myself , and , at , the , end I found here in the hospital that teaches the University of North Carolina
Uh Uh
They didnt charge me anything and they gave me all the tests
Yeah
I told him
But that isnt we need the social security from your employer So that is when they just didnt want to
So anyway Im going
Uh uh
Hello how are you Mi name is Juan
Hello hi uh Mateo
I am in San Antonio Mateo I think he talked already you are in Philadelphia
yes yes yes and you are
ah look I ma glad to talk to you again
yes how have you been
the topic is about thecnical devices I mean the technology , the most , used , devices , and , how , much do you depend on them and how you consider the dependency
yes the most obvious is the computer but is not the only one
ah
yes and that is why the same thing you buy a , car and , you , are , always , using , it , and , you , always , have , to give it maintenance you always have is part of your life
yes yes exactly also because I am here in Texas
ah
I feel that car culture here is kind of the way culture was also for horses in the days
yes
the life we have they take care of them here , and , it is as important as the horse was in that era
yes
some years ago and well if they do not say , in , our , era , of communication , the most important elecronics , are the ones that have to deal with communication and computer
yes because in Texas yes but even there in Texas
but
yes
so that
ah yes yes
yeah
of the most important
yes but the questions in the topic were which
well for me it would be my computer and cellphone
aha exactly
aha
aha
before I did not have a cellphone until I became , twenty , years old but now that I live in Philadelphia in the city and that Im not always at home for
yes yes
well I am always I am always I always have my cellphone
you have your cellphone
I think that it is very surprising that almost the whole world has a cellphone here in the United States
yes I notice that it is very important what you just said some time ago , when I worked I had the , type , of job in which the computer was the most important no
yes
yes
The computer was the most important
but now
but now with the kind of work that Im doing . the car its the more important than the computer because the car lets me do the work Im doing
But its because the kind of work
Well for me I think that well youre in Texas and obviously there are more free land and contryside and
a lot more space
yes yes
because in the cities having a car can be an inconvenient thing also
yes thats right
because you have to park it and well parking is , expensive , and , you , cant , find any gas stations near and well I dont know is
its better to have a car I think
yes well here yes because the distance you have to drive to work the car is essential
Of course
the other question the communication electronics right the cellphone and
yes
and then the other question is if you consider that this technologies are more of a problem than of
aha
lets say those problems here but in the end I dont know . I dont know what you think more more than anything . I would say that well regarding cars car issues and , ll that well you dont see a big problem unless that
we considered it like a problem interests created around around . the car industry and how they sometimes appear to affect the same development of technology of
yes
ah yes we look like seventy five years ago there were no cars but today almost everyone has
yes yes yes but yes
the same thing with computers they have they have computers that that are , not , going to , let out in the market for for like ten years because
well
because they already have the the very advanced things and the things have not they have not
yes
at one hundred kilometers with just one liter of gas
aha
yes
I say no many are saying that they are not , cost , effective and that in , reality is a matter , of manipulating company image when the times comes for viewing performance tables
I though hybrids cars would be more efficient I think the efficiency they have achieved is minimum
yes
yes that was an important change
dont you think is an important change or
ah
one ah according to the tables an economical car can provide you with thirty six miles per galon
yeah
and a hybrid can give you fifty
ah no ah yes sure sure there are some cars there as for example the the Fords
uhm well
the pickup well the pick up trucks are being changed so that they become more efficient you know
aha
but the Expedition and that type of huge cars they , do , use , lots , of , gas you can , only , drive , around , twenty , or , eighteen miles per gallon or something like that its a huge amount
the small cars the new ones that are not yet , in , the , American market , that are . now in the European or Latin Americas markets have to be more efficient
ah yes
and smaller isnt it So if we buy a car at the . price of a hybrid car and we compare it against a small , European car or to one of those cars of Latin American well
its a lot more expensive to have a car because , the , initial cost and because you will save money on gas then
European
yes its like yes
most of the countries have small cars well different its a different culture you know but
yes I do a few years ago it had something , to , do with , the , oil in the eighties or around that time I dont remember
ah aha
I thought that was going to change that the culture was . going to change because they started making smaller cars here in the United States
yes but
so I thought oh well the culture is going to change , but , it didnt it was . like a temporal thing because they still have lots of huge cars they still
I am Ana Maria
Ah Faviola hello
Hello Faviola
Very good sunny or cold
sunny and cold ah
Cold
yes
I had already touched on this subject before
I had not touched and I touched talking about specifically the person that talked to me talked about violence
mhm
No he liked the idea of going to see the movies . I say that the world is the world It has violence
mhm
It has always had and I have experience teaching children , love , and peace , on the , television , or , in the world and , then when they face the world which is the school area
They are the children that do not know how to defend themselves Especially when you have unique children
yeah
then uh I find that if the classification is good they have I think it is , the responsibility of the adults where children can go to watch television
I agree it is the ultimate responsibility of the parents
They are doing their job with the movies and
and making their money what is your job
is your business you
doing your business yes
if now he wants it you take he want to , see it he doesnt is no longer their responsibility they see
of yes
that sells
yes
and it is what they do its not their fault only of the one who buys
yes that they like the product in the end thats why
yes
with you that you are have the greatest responsibility be , violence , sex , whatever , you , want , to protect a child , for ? i think the parents have the greatest responsibility although you have a rating
because if you have a movie rating for example ~PG thirteen
yes
And you have e minor child of that age to see it its your responsibility
yes
Exactly
The why the association or whatever he puts eh you have the rating and he already has it then
I think yes look that we think almost the same on that Faviola ? because in the end the responsibility of raising and caring and what you want him to see or not
Your children or your family Eh you like a mother or your husband like a mother
mm I think as well that I am completely in agreement and , the , other , normally , the children have access to television when the parents are outside
Exactly
The children are alone
mhm
And there the father isnt there to teach them or say to them this you shouldnt watch yes you should see
Or if they go to a sleepover you dont know also
Of course you dont have a clue
If they go to a sleepover and they put a movie on they watch the , movie , or they dont have control in that house or whatever it is
You also dont know
Exactly
I think whats important is given the kids a that they , respect that signs , if , one , gives , them . good principles in the house One as a family teaches them those things
Of course
Really I dont like that or because I dont like it That , you , see , it , or , that you are not prepared or that the moment will come
That because like they say you cant keep them in a crystal box
No and also
goes exposed or exposed
Yes also and when the kids get to a certain , age , My son , had , fifteen years sixteen , sixteen years , and , he , would , say dont worry because you did the best that you could
mhm
ah it is the twenty five percent of the genes , and , the education and the rest is decision my decision of my life
Look with that
Of course then I learned Oh wait no eh oh I was and
mm
My cell phone was ringing OK OK leave that and I answer
OK
eh dont hang up because we have to talk twelve minutes
yes
I just went to pay it
OK ah
And about people I believe that I love movies watching horror movies
OK
But there are times when when they scare me and Im an adult
You you scare yourself
they make me scared and Im going to find out about horror movies
OK OK But your responsibility is to see it and you scare yourself
yes
OK well I dont like them and I dont watch , them . I dont watch any kind of those Thats also my decision , even , being , old enough to see , them , if it is too violent I dont want to see it
Yes Because of that I respect what my son told me that time fifty per cent is responsibility
Yes
of of the individual of the person eh you already , did , what . you could but there is a time when children before turning eighteen
That some are more mature than others
Yeah
And they start to watch the R movies
Um
at fourteen and fifteen years and eleven twelve year old children are watching the PG thirteen
Yeah yes
And sometimes even little ones Sometimes even younger because i remember Jennys friend that watched Harry Potter and its
Yeah thirteen right
PG thirteen PG fourteen and then i say Jenny doesnt like it it scares her
Right
Shes cared of monsters and all that
Yeah
But yeah i agree that for the most part in , the , end its about . the criteria you make for her Take care of them , if you dont want them to watch TV when theyre alone
Yeah cause because
Not leaving them alone with the TV
But imagine that you still cant control them
But its just TV no more you
Thats why Im telling you you can control them `` , you cant , watch , this . movie because this and this reason because youre not mature enough '' or whatever you want to tell them ¿right
And you have to have some judgment to watch some movies
Yeah thats why Im telling you you get nothing from , telling , her , `` , you cant watch that '' . so because there will be a time when shell go to a house how can i say her friends house
aha in the same school they show movies
Oh the same school but the same school is a bit more supervised because that is . already a different thing Because because it goes it goes with an end
They show documentaries
but Im more afraid when he goes to friends houses , And , sometimes , they , have the television in the , piece , the most that it is used or the computer or whatever it is
Maybe they are looking at something inadequate But thats what . I say whatever happens its that my son and my daughter or whatever it is
Continue like like superman the little boy that climbed on the window and killed himself
It of course because you know that they are not yet prepared
aha
yes Okay
yes yes I am preparing myself I am already buying . my familys presents But at the moment I am with everything with other things on my mind
youre on a birthday no
yes but but I am already preparing buying presents for the family , at least , for my nephews . I already have them ready we have already bought them presents then the big people remain no less
Thats what I was going to tell you
I am going to cook yes ah
yes also for some kids yes too
No that the table thing
yes the the yes too but i have no time , i , still have to wait , until mid until the last week of December to do it
Oh because theyre
because i have no time before
Yes and thats what Im doing too Thats why im , doing some , gifts , but . for example am the Andreita for example its her birthday soon
Oh ok yes but i remember that it was like three days
For the re a screen of those that draw and erase
Oh thats so nice
Because she likes it right she already met them and . she likes them she draws little lines and then she erases , them , and ? she has the i am not going to give them , to , them , yet , because , theyre very little and she would put them in her mouth
Aw thats very nice
Its so exciting
Right so you see Things like that are a joy , to , do . so i bought the same for little Andrea And thats it
¿Who
That i remember when i was there
My father in law that
Your father in law yeah
Him Juan Luis Sandras youngest son
Oh yeah right
Also on on the twenty nine I remember that also around . the same date i remember that theyre all around the same date
No you were there you went to Chile once and you left her the gift for his birthday
Oh well that was on April it was April when i went to Chile
Ok that was another birthday because shes three
I leave the presente there
yes for her nephew who came after
Of course he came he told me after i gave it to him but he didnt say his name
Sandra will not organise her birthday she will not make a party this year
no no OK
I didnt say no i mean just for the family , because they are going to buy something better for the kid
yes thats true
Thats because she does a very big parties
yes very yes
She spend a lot of money in that and now she cant afford it to the kid
what they really want exactly
they have to decide between one or another thing this year the kid decided to be with the family
to have a special gift
Sure to have one more present
Juan Luis is the oldest or the youngest
The smallest kid of all
oh yes
and he said he doesnt want any clothes
Poor kid
I dont want books i just want toys
Carolina
Tamara
yea and you
Im in washington seattle
wow Im in los angeles
oh yeah
yeah its incredible its great
yeah
I was making a call and then i realized that it was , sunday , i fell , asleep , for , half , an hour more than usual i was like oh my god
yeah this is it i think this is my twenty third call
wow youre almost ready Im halfway there im on the tenth part
yeah and this is the second time i take their services
oh okay okay yeah because i casually received a letter that they are taking . intakes so they can participate again because at first you could have only participated once
yes i know
Thats good tell me
Well Ill tell you honestly its been more than a year since we stopped watching movies on regular film
little `` conventional ''
aha
We had a movie for example in the case of , film , its , the , same as with , the television Now we see this documentary style films Eh with other messages then
more important things to talk about
Exactly exactly
Sometimes because we had little children they want to watch , movies ? with use and we take them but not usually Time , ago , we , went like two or three times per moth to the cinema
No no and then we started to get information in , other , kinds , of , movies . and well we moved completely to that side right now are with
a movement like those we are kind of intellectual but now we have reach a stage where you feel like
a really different feeling they are worth but lately I think they are making movies just for doing them
yes exactly
Im from Panama
Oh Okay Im from Venezuela
Oh okay
Right yes
in then it is true its true
Honestly not And the same is happening now with the . TV We had cable and just about a month ago , we cut it because i dont know suddenly it was like
we were against that we saw there was a lot , of manipulation from , the media they , only , show you the news that they want they hide the truth
uh so thats the news level and about the movies . so its like yeah why not a good movie a really good movie
with the media were like reluctant yeah yeah
Yeah what youre saying its true Over here i my husband and i we watch the news
I think right
Because every time you watch something or they show you something really stupid
Exactly
Or they exaggerate it a lot
Exactly
Because when i was we were in Panama before Noriega got out of Panama
Oh imagine that
And we were there and my husband you know hes a white , man , paper , white , compared , to my dad my dad , is , brunette and my mom is white so i was darker than my dad so
when we went out you knew he was American
Yeah obviously
And we both got we got into where we were . going and he had to go to work into the , base ? and i had to go with him or something like that
of course
and suddenly we would arrive home and we would watch ? TV there was so much little things that happened at Panama I would watch him
exactly
and the next day the same thing I say ay what , an , ex , agente , I think they were teaching , the thing that they showed last week and exaggerating the thing so
Exactly
the news nothing like that that is what I tell my kids do not believe everything that the TV says
right
Just when the Noriega problem and everything else we looked all . the documentary I stood cold because in reality I never imagined it to be so depressing and so
so horrible what happened
That was the documentary they talked about the man that got his head chopped off
and oh yeah
no he doesnt remember
I dont remember exactly dont remember but what I remember is that night when , they bombarded and so many people died even nowadays they showed one
i think they were called The Rishos from the Chinese sector where all that village practically disappeared
Oh from Churillo
Uh from Chorrillo exactly
Right But that one youre talking about look it happens , just like that in Venezuela , with . the current president Some things are happening that you know theyre happening
Univision I told them not to be so cynical dont , show , things , that arent , real , the . first thing people tells you is `` huh that president ''
Its uncommon and people doesnt accept that And hes not . vulgar hes not common and people doesnt accept that so he even is the first to criticize all that
Sure sure look theres a website in the internet where , you . can watch TV from all countries including Panama of course its called
But I specifically watch the government channel there the national channel , Because , the , other channels belong . to the opposition so of course it is a little more of the same
OK
Then I compare it and since I have this webpage , now , I dont turn , the TV , on , Now , we are there glued to the internet watching the channels from
damn truly they manipulate it too much
Did you give yourself one I dont know if you saw here a movie called Auto fox
no maybe but I dont remember
It was a documentary that worked at Fox News
mmh
and well they practically forced them to say what was ? not and then they decided to resign from the station , and besides , resigning they got together and started to protest at a certain level
well at a certain a local level to tell the world how they were doing inside , Fox News It is very interesting it is called something like
How is
from Washington
Washington ~DC
Yes Washington State
Ah OK and the other
Yes Im here in Idaho state I dont know if youve heard of it
Yes yes yes of course
Yes this one the truth is a lot of that is movies . the truth is a lot of things em from my point , of , view really there isnt much in common with me because after
you dont know how to classify it very very well , Eh , for , example , after , sometimes they , say , its ~PG and after eh you see that movie and really
You have a lot of profanity and and pornography that sometimes is . more forward for example ~PG thirteen sometimes is more I dont know its quieter
And there isnt too many things like nudity and profanity , For me honestly ah those classifications for me no sometimes no
They dont know people that critique those movies no dont . know how to classify them or or I dont know what your point of view would be
Yes honestly I dont know much about movies because
ha
lets say i dont have kid or anything so Im never aware
ha
what what a classification
ha
but i think that the majority of people that we . have lets say during half day is when most kids are at home
ha
theyre things that are not really appropriate for the majority
yeah
more things are normal i dont think they should be that way
yeah thats true because once well i dont have cable i have normal cable the ones that
ha
so that i can choose my program that Im going to see during that time
i stopped in that channel there were things that were for adults
of course
The I said ufm I said I thought the kids I said well . I I Im married three years married and i have a boy of almost 2 years old
OK
Maybe my son will grow and maybe this will move forward for the worst Then
Um
It was ten at night exactly ten at night Then . I had eh I had cable there and had the the the cable to
and there was an English cartoon Then I quit And thi my mom was then then was quite watching a cartoon television channel
eh on Cablevision and Multivision which would be what cable , here , there , in , Mexico , doesnt , have too many restrictions But for example on regular television normal channels
they have like more more restrictions Eh not so much , on , other , cables , and , for example in on TV for example normal channels for children
in Mexico City mmh
before in Mexico But for example if you are watching , a cable , channel , you , already , risk that the cartoon can be about something that sometimes that some
I yes I look I am Colombian and I think that in Colombia
Then uy aha
television is much better that here in this sense
Then her boy was watching eh the a cartoon channel , and , then , the , girl decided , to , change , the , TV , and , and , it was another channel that also was programmed for them for children
Aha but you could see it and I grabbed her and , I told her to her mother and she , told me there is no problem it is a channel of
of of cartoons of of they show shows And sincerely , it was it was , no , they , didnt , leave , much , to the , imagination It was , really like , posing well , but it was an operations room where the woman was having her baby
whatever they want But honestly I I dont want to explain , so much to my , children at this moment because honestly I watch more what they
they dont leave nothing to the my to the imagination they show it to you
yes
Already at any at any time of the day you watch . one of those soap operas I dont like watching soap operas But you see
And in broad daylight because the soap operas then passed , from one to six in the morning until it was dark
No I
Then the programs are already sorted and a scene of , pornography . on television at any time of day is normal And for many
parents this unfortunately is normal
They dont care mhm
That will be taught And then so will these classifications , I , do not like , And , I dont think these producers care I feel that to them it is because
Sometimes and
Then no For me in particular the movies I like to tell you the truth are Disney
Yes yes yes
Though now Im married and I love all that I have some here from another Disney movie Honestly I do not like movies
so now yes
like i sometimes i see that i dont realize how much are changing the things
Good evening Im Mariza from Philadelphia
Mariza Mariza
Oh maybe yes
It could be Im in San Antonio Texas
Okay so todays theme is uh the question of religion
Exactly like how the need for religion is something that that we all have I suppose
And this like all needs institutions try to
Yes
It is really today in this country Uh in the . United States too theres a big big problem with religion , that it mixes . with politics and there are a lot of people on the right who want control
Mm hm
That totally represented an ideological project but that by plan . is among the most conservative groups there is in the United States
yes
In the sermon above all what attracted my attention against the public school
Why what yes
ah ah no
and against the theory that that they try to see the evolucion theory no
So that I have heard that yes
Exactly yes there are many problems yes
No each can believe what they want what happens is that they try to . impose their belief for all the world and to be the bible that it be the what think
Exactly they are fundamentalism no
Yes what fundamentalism yes yes yes the right but it ia also ? the country is eh the power is with the party and . the All from the president and all involved in is in the white house they are all the conservative rights
The right to have an abortion for example how another , question was about homosexuality gay marriages the beleif right the of
yes more scientific no no we should not believe only on . what they say they say God created man and woman also to give an opinion so the children can beleive
that was Charles Darwin the theory of evolution And
But
But I think that maybe the more similar we are the more problems we have no
Sure for me I dont have any
The topic the topic of homosexuality is very polemic
mhm
But in a given time its not a lets see , like tolerance , the phenomenon of , homosexuality , must , be something that that , in , which , were . very well informed no I personally think for example before I thought
it could be a deviation homosexuality but lately I have read that its also a question a genetic issue
Like you accept people for I didnt think that they were better . nor worse for being homosexuals and everyone has a right to to well I dont know to marry to
Well yes
to be with whom they want Its the same if . its a man or a woman I care I dont care , and , I think that they have the ? same rights because they are citizens all the same and they pay the same taxes
well a lot of people pose the question of homosexuality , as , an issue , very perverse , and , that they have the , right , to marriage . not when its a quest of when the marriage is in reality a contract
mhm
between two people that decide to do something in common
No
think that thats an abomination because marriage is defined as a union between a man , and , woman , they , believe and , it , and , the , people , and , the , devoted , Christian , fundamentalists . just like I was saying before they see this as , an , abomination , and they are so closed off that they dont understand that
aha
People are accepting the fact that people yeah well if , you . at a person whos homosexual yes and theyre worthwhile people So then
The necessity of first to change and find new new ways of learning the lessons of life
About society and of individuals right
hmm
Is like a paradox to do not accept the difference they think but aha
What happens is that if It is that in this country the children when they , are . those families christian families from the right wing let´s say they , raise . their children in a way that they teach them since , they , are , very little that things must be that way and then then
when they are adults and meet different people then they say that is . not that way because I was taught that is like , this and this and this and it must be like this
You know they are very radicals not they don´t accept , the differences , because they were raised in a way their parents did then
yes
For example me I had the luck to travel a lot , and meet , people , of , all . the races several cultures then I am open minded to everything
Yes I they are
With the churches there is a good proportion of fundamentalists even in the president speech there are some fundamentalism
Of course yes yes
that understood more the things to the persons and this . government take it the religious the christian of righties I mean the ones who are
Saying how things are made in the country and that is . why there is so much controversy with marriage its also , with , the . supreme court with the jury who want them to be righties and religious well
catholics or whatever they might be they also want to to take off the , rights of abortion , and stuff like that that is ridiculous in this height of this century
But that is how we are right now
Me in my family we are In Spain I am cat , Catholicism , say , is , when , you , are . born and they baptize you the first communion and all that
I think Im goo and I have my thoughts but , I dont go , to church , every , Sunday . nor practice religion I know but dont practice I am I think
But we say that I speak for myself and what we say I will carry with me
yes
or or Im not and wont be I am very , open , and , it would , be contradictory if , I thought that I am Catholic but I know Im not I am not covered
if the same thing happens to me sometimes and when . I have a temporary problems with the church because its Catholic I can almost almost hear you ? say that there is a sense of integration and community here
It seems they have interest in all
mhm
Hi good evening
Good evening My names is Carolina
from Los Angeles
oh okay I thought that that that it was another person Are you okay
Yeah
I am here from Los Angeles
please to talk to you
Well tonight we have to talk about technical appliances
I am from Peru
Eh I am of Colombian residence
mhm
Oh but you speak like a mexican
Right
Oh right sure
Oh
Uh um
Uh um
Now i got the Mexican spanish
Which is whats spoken here
Oh and i think that Hispanics here are like ninety five per cent mexican
Yes
Yes well i use i use computers
Yeah
Mhm
so its very useful because Im look for work I do surveys look for women
Mhm
Mhm Yea aha
it was very slow
So I had to wait some two or three minutes just for a single page to appear
Yeay sure
The webcam is when they can see you ah like in tele li video conference conference
Mm Mhm
Well to me also sure and i work my work i am a manager and , then , uh . i use it for work and to me the computer i mean that
Yes
And i have really adapted well and Ive loved it since , ive , been , using . the computer Because before when we used the typing machine it was so slow to
Um sure i think that they have uh they have , done more discoveries on the computer than what they have on medicine
Thats true
The computer is the most advanced thing in todays civilization
Right yes and for everything ¿right i mean its all you
Yes
want you can find it there and when you take a seat on , the , well , i use it for work but also when Im home and i need
Yes exactly
For everything because if you need to know hows the weather out there well you go to the computer
News sports
Before it was um
Ah dates with women everything
yes yes yes
No and even this survey that we are discussing now I found it online too
Oh yes also oh
yes almost mm so the Internet does have a lot of influence
in our lives Twenty two this is a twenty two calls
Oh and he so you are almost done
Yes Im almost done I still have three left one , of , them is , a call , in , which someone , spoke mostly , in English so I think I will have to replace him
Oh I see I see
Yeah aha
Mm I see
Yes they do they replace the call
yes oh I see aha
And Im going to ask him if i have to replace him
Yes
Yes its easy hes easy to talk to
No he must be in Philadelphia
But but he gave me the phone num
No no no no
Oh just through the computer
But he he talks to the participants
Oh ¿yeah
Yeah well i dont know if hes the owner he is
Oh
yes that supervisor of the project they are doing
Yes of course and
I dont know if if you knew
No no I dont know but is possible that yes because I I have already done two
yes and this what we are doing now is technology
Oh Oh
because they are doing connections by the telephone
and this is technology yes something like that it was the same thing but it was in English
And they paid the same
to speak in Spanish
Of course
Mm ya
Oh OK aha
OK
This couldnt have been done twenty thirty years ago what we are doing now
Exactly aha
because they are using multiple phone lines to connect many people who live in different parts of the country
I believe that telephone technology they have made advances also , because , now , I can make long . distance calls and they dont cost me anything because you pay
ah a monthly fee
Aha
and you can make al the calls you want
A lot cheaper
Yeah youre right
yes the technology
Now you can speak three or five hours for 5 dollars
Exactly
Before it was only a minute oh my god it was about like eight
Yes I remember that I had to talk I think that ten minutes alone used to cost me like twenty five dollaras
yes yes yes It also happened to me too
yes like that
yes yes ah I remember that you had to be with the clock in your had

< very poorly written phrase but I think this is what was supposed to mean >
Aha Clearly Yes
Then the services are a lot cheaper because they sell them to a lot more people
Of course yes
Mmm cla
Eh as an example it is the computer the computer , five years ago cost about two two or three thousand dollars
nowadays you can buy a computer for two hundred or three hundred dollars
Ah yes it is true aha
Now of course of course aha
Ah yes it is true
more advanced technology with medicine
True
Mm Mm
Mm OK
mm mm
Yeah yeah yeah
Or heart disease as well
Mhm HIV since its not mentioned almost everywhere
HIV is more advanced than cancer in in
well thats true
yeah yeah
no no no no its true
HA
its slow
Yes
They could improve that
Yes
Yes yes
That anyone can get
Yes right
Yes because she had a bleeding in her brain
And and she died immediately she had luk leukemia in the blood
And that she got that overnight
Uh
They couldnt uh
how are you ,  eh I'm guillermo ,  how are you ? 
yeah ,  yeah what about you ? 
oh ,  what are you studying ? 
What university ? 
And you what's ,  what are you studying ? 
Then ,  business ,  yes ,  but ,  then you're studying a PhD ,  a Master's ,  what is it exactly ? 
Sorry ? 
you live in Peru ,  then ? 
I ,  sorry ,  what did you say ? 
Do you live in Peru ? 
Instead of a ,  exchange student ,  for example ,  ¿right ? 
Oh ,  good .  ¿And what do you think so far ? 
¿More than in Perú ? 
I ,  I ,  I'll decide to take less courses ,  I don't know .  How many courses do you take more or less per cycle ? 
or are you dedicated full time to ,  to your studies ? 
Ah ,  I used to do that sometimes but ,  which one are you on ,  which part of the library ?  In
And you ,  where do you work ? 
Where's that ? 
ah ,  in England for example ? 
each one has its system it has its advantages .   But ,  in ,  and in Peru ,  how is it ,  in general ? 
And they are just personal tasks or group ones ? 
how come ? 
too  too cold here ,  right ? 
Hello Gloria ,  I'm Paulina ,  where you calling from  ? 
Ah  ? 
Mhm ,  and what is like  ? 
What  ? 
I was talking about religion ,  what is you opinion about it ,  if unites people ,  or separates them ,  if we all need to have the same religion or ,  what do i know  ? 
yes ,  yes ,  yes .  Like this ,  who've said ?  In my lunch time ,  the girls that I work with ,  where I work ,  three
What's religion is that ?  The one of your friend ? 
Mm ?  Where are you from ? 
Puerto Rican .  but raised in the United States ? 
If ,  you know ?  if you from Georgia ? 
Oh my God .  Yes .  yes .  It's a lot of work .  Right ?  I do ki  kid's parties .  I dress up as a clown and now I'm trying to think how to make an Elmo head . 
Ah ,  yes ? 
Have you been doing this for a long time ? 
Good evening ,  Fabiola says .  Who am I talking to ? 
This is Lliorno .  Of Philadelphia .  How are you ? 
Ah ,  how are you ? 
Good ,  thanks ,  and you ? 
yes on music opinion ,  what kind of music do you listen to ? 
do you like to dance ? 
Oh ,  I also did .  Now I dance when I am at home alone .  Are you married ? 
Ah ,  any children ? 
Do you have a favorite singer ? 
Oh ,  and where are you from ? 
and where are you from ? 
Is very good .  Do you have a cold ? 
Do you have a bit of a cold ? 
Where do you say ,  you are calling from ? 
Where do you call from ? 
Philadelphia ,  is that a city or an state ,  which ? 
This city is um .  .  are you in Washington ,  D . C or Washington state ? 
uhm hey ,  do you like Ricky Martin ? 
what ? 
Ricky Martin ? 
you have hear ? 
uh ? 
Do you know if he is good ? 
What music do they play ? 
have you hear them ? 
Ricardo Montaner ? 
Who ? 
How much ?  How much time have you been in the United States ? 
Five years and you speak English and everything ? 
Did you get your citizenship or not yet ? 
Oh ,  oh ,  do you speak Italian ? 
Ah they're not .  With the residency you're happy ?  your parents are
okay ,  are your grandparents ,  your uncles are in Italy ? 
Beautiful ,  ¿and do you have animals ,  dogs ,  cats or something ? 
Yeah ,  ¿do you have animals ? 
and do you have an idea of .  .  . of which dog would you like ? 
Good evening .  How are you ? 
yes ,  how are you ? 
Very well ,  my name is Carlos .  I'm from Houston ,  Texas ,  and you ? 
How are you doing ? 
Very well ,  very well .  What do you think about today's topic ? 
Okay .  Eh How old are you ? 
Okay .  Sorry ? 
And And you ? 
Pardon ? 
Live ?  Eh .  Like concerts ? 
Okay .  Eh ,  which type of music you like the most ? 
Do you dislike any music styles ? 
the ,  and the ,  you say you play instruments ,  eh ,  is you ,  your husband play ,  like in a band ,  or a group ? 
like i have ,  like and iPod  ,  you know wha iPod's are  ? 
Yes ? 
What ,  what are you studying ? 
and what other good things happened in your life ? 
why ?  Goods topics are good because you find good conversational topics when you talk here because they add music too .  There was music yesterday
but ,  eh ,  how it's called ?  ,  you mustn't talk about what they say to you
they are ,  and what are you doing to them that is making them laugh ? 
children are funny ,  ooh ,  they are growing .  And do you talk to them ? 
Do you have to talk to them now or not ? 
What ? 
if talk to them ,  do you talk to the children ? 
in English ? 
¿and where did she learn to speak ?  ,  ¿did she learn to speak when she was in Chile ?  ,  yes well
isn't that bad ? 
and you have planned what are you going to do for Christmas or thanksgiving ? 
for Christmas are you already planning the gifts and everything ? 
what ? 
the gifts are you planning for Christmas or not ? 
and you ? 
do you already have plans for Christmas ? 
for real ? 
and what type of car is it ? 
huh ? 
a karaoke  and do you play with it or not ? 
ehm ? 
Does the mouse have a calculator ? 
hey ? 
hey ?  I believe that´s a good idea . 
Are they going to be there for christmas ? 
but ,  she said that maybe no .  who knows why ? 
Oh um its the same thing i think ,  but how are we going to leave ,  if we recently bought this house ,  how ?  he says . 
huh ? 
huh ? 
and they are ?  are they the living room curtain ? 
Oh you haven't put on the outer window part ? 
Where are you calling from ? 
from where ? 
yes ,  Where are you from ? 
And you ? 
are you studying here in the United States ? 
And this young man heard that ,  that you live in the US ?  have you lived there all your life ? 
And now you are married with ,  is with Latin ,  or with an American ? 
sure ,  yes ,  it should be a lot more difficult ,  but ,  well I believe ,  well in the long term it is going to be very good also ,  no ?  that way you grow up with two languages and that is a strenght
Then you have ,  have taught even in high school or what  ? 
I imagine that you must have studied something like about Education or something like that no ? 
or what did you study ? 
marvelous things and maybe only one can't be selected true ? 
Uh um ,  your husband ,  you met him ¿where ? 
But ,  but it's nice ,  it's really nice ,  and then ,  ¿what's the best that has happened to you ,  your best memory ? 
where do you live ? 
yes but she will do it for sure .  What did you study ? 
Well my name is Claudia Ivette .   With whom do I have the pleasure ? 
my pleasure as well .   Where are you ? 
From where ,  what ? 
this is a place called Robert this .   And you where are you speaking from ? 
because if you say no ,  turn around ,  no ,  no ,  you must not see that ,  then a teenager or a kid will start thinking ,  ah ,  but why won't mom let me see that ? 
What's your name ? 
Joe ? 
yes ,  and what's your name ? 
Alex .  where are you from ? 
Where are you from again ? 
Well ,  and what do you think about tonight's topic ? 
obvious right ?   But ehm I think that the   R or ,  those days it is very stretched what is allowed or not .   Ehm ,  ehm ,  I agree that
many movies ,  right ?  that don't make any sense for example ,  there are many movies about gang members that that the gang members many gang members are the ones that go to see it because since
the society ,  the parents ,  the family has a lot to do in helping the children to understand those things and and how to  send them ,  right ?   And I with my daughter ,  I do not ,  when
Do you have teenagers ? 
and if he goes and have sex with this girl ,  well this are the consequences ,  this can happen to you ,  do you understand ? 
Well ,  i was thinking ,  dear mother ,  ¿how can it be ?  ,  hey ,  we got a very difficult subject today
¿Where are you from ? 
They twist the facts about what's happening and then I always find po  with people that ,  for example ,  tell me good heavens .  and what do you think about the mad man that you have for president ?  and
wanted to tell you was that ,  after they've said a bunch of outrageous stuff ,  no ? 
When you try to say something to the other person ,  look things are like this ,  don't you see ?  Then they say no ,  because you are
Right ,  that what they say to me sometimes ,  What are you doing here ? 
In ,  uh ,  at any given time ,  but that has nothing to do with the opposition ,  because ,  for example ,  ¿how many Venezuelan people don't live in Venezuela ?  ,  and what they're doing it's bashing
Because ,  ¿why are you here ?  ,  and well ,  maybe you would do the same ,  thank god that you're here ,  not in Venezuela . 
outstandingly high ,  that people cannot ,  uh ,  they don't protest ,  i say ,  oh my god ,  but ¿what's wrong with these people ?  ,  i mean
How ever ,  i tell you ,  i don't know ,  suddenly here .  ¿are you in ,  in Pennsylvania you told me ? 
Me too ,  me at first that there wasn't I didn't have access to that ,  that website I said ,  My god ,  is it true about they are saying about venezuela ?  but I talked with my friends
Of course ,  of course ,  and what are you doing there in Philadelphia ? 
Oh ,  and you think is better than Miami ? 
And wath we shall do ?  Job is first . 
But ,  how long you're in the United States ? 
Twelve ? 
Then ,  before I also see to Americans like the gringos ,  now I understand that no ,  they are americans that are from USA ,  because that is another wrong concept that is handles ¿isn't ?  then , 
why ?  Why ? 
Well my name is Ibet ,  with whom do I have the pleasure ? 
Hello Mercedes , how are you ?  Where are you from Mercedes ? 
Oh from Honduras ? 
Ah .  from where ? 
And you where are you from ? 
Ah .  from where  ?  The City eh , Capitol
What do you think of today's topic ?  That it is easier to break up with someone young or do age make a difference . 
And was there a time when you had a break up that was difficult ? 
eh I'm going to have three children I was placing my castles in the sky and when he came and said you know what ?  here no .  here it ends . 
What ? 
How great .  The best .  But for what ?  If you have trouble ,  you get trouble . 
And what about you ? 
Yes ,  and what's happening with you ? 
You are married now ? 
I think that it has to be the worst experience ,  I think ,  of your life it's ,  yes ,  and I hope ,  I hope it never happens because we don't know ,  right ? 
Yes ,  one always loves the person but it's impossible that it's only is peace ,  then that is what I'm saying ,  right ? 
Because one ,  well I ,  I am one ,  a human and one has to ,  things that very bother other people .  You know ?  And
yes ,  the truth  ,  I think that it is something of the truth ,  it is very difficult to maintain the appearance  that everything is happy fine ,  you know ?  but
that ,  really ,  you won't know her very depths ,  you know ?  until you are married to that person but that but that I think that I think that
the drama is ,  well ,  a lot ,  right ?  so then the people don't know how to go out and move on ,  right ?  that happens . 
And i told he ,  ¿what's with the glasses ?  ,  it was ,  well the day was cloudy ,  ¿right ?  ,  and she had a bruise because her boyfriend hit her . 
How is it going ,  Fabiola ?  How are you ?  Mm . 
Well .   And you ? 
Well ,  well .   Where are you ? 
In Washington ?  yes . 
And you ? 
From Maracaibo ? 
No ,  you know ,  know .   Why ,  do you know people from there ? 
Oh ,  yeah ,  yeah ,  Well ,  you know that they have a very strong accent No ?  Something like ,  look and you .  MN . 
look and you Are you arepa ? 
Mhm Oh Do you work at the Hilton ? 
Do you work ? 
Yes ,  Yes ,  Yes .  Now im ,  is in the oral part .  No ?  I'm in the other side of ,  of ,  Mm ,  of the ,  mm
and ?  talk ? 
But ,  definitively they are going to have that option ,  well .   That even in ,  eh ,  it is/ there are some parents who combine ,  sign language with the oral part .   No ?   Depending on , 
and what do you think about ,  about the subject they gave us today about  ? 
eh ,  sometimes it is a little difficult .   No ?  But ,  I think that love is the only thing that makes it possible to overcome barriers ,  nothing else . 
they can overcome ,  what do you think ? 
And ,  twelve ,  imagine that .  And ,  and we really have had ,  well ,  two critical moments ,  almost splitting .  And ,  and ,  there was a point where also maturity plays an important role there ,  ¿right ? 
ah ,  that is what I say ,  if I fall ,  I stand up again .  What is the problem ? 
Right ?  whatever ,  exactly .  Then ,  fortunately ,  well ,  eh ,  the first time it was horrible ,  because I thought it was the end of the world .  And ,  then we were for a long time without talking to each other until a day ,  I say ,  well ,  What is going on ? 
Hm ,  horrible ,  horrible ,  horrible .  I told him ,  look ,  You know what ?  it looks to me , 
hear me ,  not ,  terrible ,  a big tantrum on our part ,  really .  I told him Do you know ?  this looks to me like a big tantrum on our part . 
Let's get going .  Because ,  putting aside how serious the situation might be ,  it   fortnately it wasn't too serious ,  but ,  uh ,  seeing as neither of them wanted to twist anyone's arm ,  right ? 
Because   what are we going to do with a mediocre relationship ?  I don't want a mediocre rlationship .  As you yourself say ,  there are people who spent up to 30 years together ,  and that's a nasty relationship . 
Really ? 
It's that they treat each other badly .  This ,  look here ,  this piece of whatchamacallit ,  what   what is that ?  What do I want that for ? 
No ?  There is respect .  and , 
No ?  There are some that mention love .  If there is no love there is nothing . 
Of course .  Is your husband from Chile too ? 
You think it's easier ? 
And ,  that ,  that's what I said ? 
what did you say ?  Or when we are super b 
Hello ,  hello ,  how are you ? 
Oh ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  and you ? 
really ?  Me too . 
Really ? 
How long have you been living here ? 
and what is it called ,  and of course then would come and go but more less the ninety one ,  yes .   And you ? 
And and you ,  where are you from ? 
From Santiago as well ? 
And have you been here long in this thing ?   Of calling over the phone ? 
oh really ? 
Hello ? 
Yes ,  yes ,  and what can we do if that happens ? 
I thought ,  i thought that it was like this ,  this study ,  to do ,  ¿what's it called ?  ,  telephone menu's and stuff like that . 
Oh ,  ¿because you shouldn't or because you don't want to ? 
Right .  and do you like it here ? 
Oh ,  and why ? 
yes ,  okay .  But ,  do you have to drive your car a lot or do you use public transportation ? 
and how did you get there ? 
yeah ,  i married an american ,  that's how i got here ,  what about you ? 
oh really ? 
So then ,  you are single now ? 
okay ,  ah look ,  and and ,  what do you call it ,  do you like it or not ? 
Hi .  How are you ?  Mi name is Juan .  Marcela . 
yes ,  how are you ? 
I have not forgotten .  We practiced together ,  no ?  Yes .  Listen ,  But I am ,  it's time ,  health . 
Do you have social security here ?  Are you covered ? 
Is a problem right ? 
We are not covered .  Is a problem because ,  well something could always happen ,  right ? 
people in the community ,  right ? 
no ?  yes ,  he gave me some .  So ,  yes ,  it's something that we think should be more flexible ,  right ,  for the community ,  for a certain type of community
because of the demand and because people keep paying those prices ,  so costs go up because people ask for more and more money .  And then ,  people need more money ,  it's a vicious cycle .  So ,  how could they possibly create a more social medicine ? 
With that .  Because here ,  I don't know what it is like where you live .   But here ,  if anyone has money it's the nurses and the doctors .  Right ? 
So .  Mm .  And here ,  well like you say ,  you see a good car with a woman who is thirty years old ,  for example ,  no ? 
Yes ,  yes I uh uh .  Well here in this case well that is what is offered .  In Canada ,  I understand ,  well ,  they have a lot of medicine ,  right ? 
is expensive ,  no ?  And then I don't know how the medicines here are ,  in Mexico they are cheaper and is more like that
No ?  yes .  yes .  And here there's only one .  And second that in literature she's not the best .  And it is hey but only the laboratories ,  I thought that all of the North American laboratories well uh
Super strong interests in everything ,  no ? 
According to the specialty they have to operate over here .  Do you know what you would have to do ? 
Why don't you contact an organization that is called the Shriners ? 
yes I knew about that .  Listen ,  is our time up or what ? 
with the epilepsy ,  no ? 
no ?  After you know that always you are hoping that it doesn't happen .  Well ,  I don't know what what happens really no But then that trauma but to my poor son because he's a teenager then
Of course because on top of it it's embarrassing .   Look ,  how old is he ? 
How old is he ? 
Yes .   Also do you you know where you can find out ?  In teaching hospitals
go to people that don't ,  can't pay in the situation as one usually would ,  you see ?  Like we how can't go to a specialist because it costs a lot of money . 
Ah ,  Yea ? 
With the university Ah ? 
Mm .  Uh uh .  Therefore ,  they told me I needed to bring them information .  I had a letter from my admissions ,  etc ,  no ? 
No ?  Well I don't .  But ,  well now I have my own social security ,  my own . 
listen ,  fine everything is fine ,  what do you think about today's topic ? 
no ,  I did not listen to it ,  what is the topic ? 
and you consider the tecnology ,  no ?  your daily life ,  if it turns out to be more a problem than a solution or something like that . 
does that include automobile ,  cars ? 
is the same that ,  is the same that I was thinking ,  of course ,  it should be included ,  no ? 
yes because is a ,  you know ?  a machine
exactly ,  yes ,  but ,  I said well yes ,  the automobile seems to be the most important ,  no ?  is then I thought maybe is the computer ,  but no
aha ,  exactly but sometimes ,  eh ,  what seems like a more personal element depending on the case ,  then it can be the car ,  no ?  because the computer is now every time more just another tool
then more than ,  than ,  sometimes ,  lets say that it is part of the institution where you are found ,  no ?  is more like a working tool
but a very personal tool seems to the car ,  no ? 
because you have to take care of the car and you know ? 
did you use horses more ? 
no ?  it is like a horse ,  it is something very personal very close
eh what allows communications and all that no ? 
you all need a car you know ?  to work
exactly and here the working people have ,  like in those times a like a mule no ?  need a pick up a truck pick up
pick up truck , no ?  and go and give ,  and for it not to leave yoy ,  then it is you can tell like there is a culture for hard work very important
and the computers ,  good ,  well all the houses there is television ,  telephone and computers practically ,  no ?  but ,  but how are there other dimensions no ?  of the technological question ,  then the auto appears to be
ah ,  what what tecnological question ,  is technology important in your life ?  what is that we are discussing right now if it had to be the auto or if it had to be the computer ?  what you do you opine ? 
because you know ?  because i have my cellphone and I am always with it
and ,  well I have become used to having a cellphone ,  you know ? 
I'm always returning to my house for ,  for ,  you know ?  see my messages
and well ,  the computer had the messages ,  it always had internet ,  e mail messaging more than the cellphone ,  no cellphone nothing ,  no ? 
more physical right ?  ,  then the care becomes the most important instrument ,  and the computer ,  well ,  it goes to a second instance ,  but it is also important ,  right ? 
is more a problem that a help ,  but obviously ,  you know ?  ,  obviously
oh really ? 
But also in the city ,  I think ,  and the most import .  .  .  ,  well ,  according to the job ,  it might be the computer ,  right ?  then
we .  .  what type of problems can you have ,  no ?  as you just said ,  with the car ,  the problems that have to do with parking
no ?  here in Texas no ,  there is not ,  where I am there are not many problems ,  no ?  with parking there is a lot of space everywhere ,  no ,  it hasn't presented yet
of transportation ,  no ?  for example
aha ,  but ,  don't you think that also ,  it is like wonderful that that it has changed in like sixty years ? 
charged the development costs ,  you understand ?  I don't know how to explain it well but
exactly yes ,  but as they also say ,  with the car industry ,  no ?  if the car industry had advanced technologically as much as the electronics industry perhaps cars could transport us with
no ?  and instead of costing twenty thousand dollars ,  they would be costing two thousand dollars
If that's the case ,  no ?  but technology ,  that industry at best ,   has its own interests and it's as if it doesn't advance no ?  you heard what they are saying about the hybrids
no ?  no I don't think they have a real real ,  that they it is really an important change in technology given its efficency
Pardon me ? 
no ,  no I don't think it is so important at the same time the efficiency they show es radically different than that of other cars it is too little .  no ?  you see that's what I say
yes ,  that's right ,  sure ,  but at the same time ,  for example ,  these cars ,  the small cars ,  they have the same performance as the hybrid cars ,  and they are not hybrids ,  no ? 
it's cheaper that a normal car ,  a good economical car ,  right ? 
and ,  why is that ? 
why are the United States one of the only countries to have this ,  why do we have this huge cars ,  you know ? 
How are you ? 
Well ,  and you ?  How is the weather our there in you home ? 
Because we are ugly ,  we are cold .  How are the movies ?  Had we already spoken about this issue ? 
Is because you let him and thought that is okay .  Isn't that right  ? 
eh ,  did you read the rules to the game on the telephone ? 
I was asking myself ,  ah ,  how is this ?  are you already preparing for Christmas ? 
¿And what what did you buy to Miranda ? 
No ,  ¿who ? 
Yeah ,  that's true ,  ¿who ? 
Tamara ,  how are you ? 
good good ,  where are you ? 
yeah ,  yeah you got me out of base ,  but do you have time participating in this ? 
Did you get the same email ?  right ? It will apparently continue ,  that's what i understood in the email i received . 
So what you think of about what they put in the movies ? 
Watch movies that are in uh ,  what do you call this ?  ,  Lost festivals ,  here is an example the recently completed International Latin American Film Festival
pid ,  so dumb that i felt annoyed to be there ,  and well ,  what are we doing here ?  ,  why I'm wasting my time ? 
What are we doing ?  I mean ,  I prefer going to sleep that to watch those thins ,  but there are movies that have
Yes ,  it's like ,  "Well ,  we have to make 10 movies ,  let's make them ,  how ?  ,  when ?  ,  it doesn't matter"
As they role as we said .  Where are you from ? 
We say like this ,  "a lo Macho" ,  ¿right ?  ,  like ,  well ,  yeah make movies ,  whatever ,  but yeah there are some good and others ,  well ,  they're not but
but then they repeated it ,  and repeated it ,  and repated it .  ¡Oh my God .  ,  ¿What's this ?  ,  we're paying for this ,  so it's like a annoying ,  we're annoyed with
Hey weren't you and I by there this morning ?  I don't remember looking nothing like that there . 
It was there and people were protesting that ¿why didn't the current president do something to remember the victims there ? 
Tell me ? 
Hi Fernanda ,  how are you ?  My name is Claudia . 
Where are you speak  ?  Good .  From where are you speaking ? 
Ah ,  which one of the two ? 
Ah ,  yes because ,  after ,  I think there two no ? 
And you ,  where are you ? 
and i think that the americans ,  like um ,  their morals have lowered ,  do you understand ?  so
but for example ,  i had cable for a little while ,  and sometimes like ,  what at like ?  ten in the morning ,  and i like changing channels . 
because ,  can happen ,  let's say at ten at night and the programs that they sure are never ,  you don't run the risk ,  no ?  that they are as bad as here .   Here
ah ,  yes ? 
what they watch .   no ?  in that respect .   But ,  uf
that if we keep going like that maybe until Disney is going to be porno right ?  so
because sometimes even they draw her ,  i don't know i have seen the commercials  so you dont afraid because your big no ?  but
i am getting use to it myself do you understand me ?  we say
Maybe  Mariza ,  we talked a few days ago ,  I believe ,  right ? 
to provide an answer .   And it ends up being a form of control ,  right ? 
for real ? 
No , terrible they said Because it is harrassing to teachers that teach the bible ,  to explain world creation ? 
Yes well ,  but in this case ,  to accept the differences looks like something that relates to a matter of humanity ,  right ? 
In this country ,  they are so fundamentalists ,  right ? 
right ,  and you have ,  practically some religion in particular ? 
OH ,  How are you Carolina ?  Your are speaking with Alex
How are you Alex ? 
Where are you from ? 
and you ? 
Colombian ? 
mma  ,  many things and ,  and I don't like to wait for the ,  the pages ,  you get me ? 
¿And you ? 
the most essential ,  and mostly ,  uh ,  and the new technologies ,  ¿right ?  ,  the new technology that has come out and every day new things come out ,  ¿right ? 
write forms and documents ,  and everything ,  now everything is done through the computer and the interer ,  ¿right ?  ,  so ,  it's something wonderful
To me ,  it's essential ,  i think i don't know what i could do without the computer ,  ¿right ?  ,  so ,  I'm really happy with this new technology ,  and i wish it keeps
going forward more every day ,  ¿right ? 
some information ,  well ,  i sit on the computer and no one can stop me ,  that when it's like ,  an essential part of your life ,  ¿right ? 
Sure ,  how many calls have you made ? 
But ,  do they make the payment once you finish the twenty five calls ,  or not ? 
Oh ,  really ? 
Oh ,  uh ,  ¿do you know the owner ? 
Oh ,  he's from ,  ¿is he from California ? 
Oh ,  ¿but do you know him in person ? 
Oh ,  yeah ,  oh ,  ¿yeah ?  ,  oh ,  no ,  i have never spoken to him ,  i . 
Oh ,  this one is your second ,  oh ,  yes ? 
Okay ,  Okay Ah and the other one was the same ,  twenty five calls ? 
Okay and they paid you the same also ? 
And what technology do you use more ?  This is what we are doing now is technology . 
back in time it was really expensive ,  do you remember ?  ,  For calling your country
Now is cheaper ,  right ? 
And why is that ?  ,  Technology
and I had to be very careful cause they used to be with forward clock ,  no  ? 
yes ,  I've had it .  The truth is that for ten years I've been wihing for the technologies to advance .  No  ? 
Because it has to be advanced ,  no  ? 
Do you understand me  ? 
They have to look for cures like ah ,  cancer eh ,  if you can go to the moon ,  why can't they find a cure for cancer ?  yes it can be ,  yes they can do a
Super fast computer that can think ,  why can't they find a cure to cancer ? 
its true ,  how many years has cancer been around for ? 
Yea ,  how many people ,  right ?  does it kill . 
and there's no cure ,  right ?  they cant find one ,  right ? 
right ?  and that shortens a lot of peoples lives
have you ever heard about a new cure for cancer ? 
I wish ,  right ?  ,  i wish that there's something ,  that God enlightens them ,  so that they can find something that can ,  uh ,  cure this catastrophe that cancer is ,  no matter how old you are ,  but that gets to you ,  right ? 
Oh my god ,  ¿in three days ?  ,  oh . 
Right .  And they couldn't do anything about it ,  right ? 
how are you ,  eh I'm guillermo ,  how are you ? 
yeah ,  yeah what about you ? 
oh ,  what are you studying ? 
What university ? 
And you what's ,  what are you studying ? 
Then ,  business ,  yes ,  but ,  then you're studying a PhD ,  a Master's ,  what is it exactly ? 
Sorry ? 
you live in Peru ,  then ? 
I ,  sorry ,  what did you say ? 
Do you live in Peru ? 
Instead of a ,  exchange student ,  for example ,  ¿right ? 
Oh ,  good .  ¿And what do you think so far ? 
¿More than in Perú ? 
I ,  I ,  I'll decide to take less courses ,  I don't know .  How many courses do you take more or less per cycle ? 
or are you dedicated full time to ,  to your studies ? 
Ah ,  I used to do that sometimes but ,  which one are you on ,  which part of the library ?  In
And you ,  where do you work ? 
Where's that ? 
ah ,  in England for example ? 
each one has its system it has its advantages .   But ,  in ,  and in Peru ,  how is it ,  in general ? 
And they are just personal tasks or group ones ? 
how come ? 
too  too cold here ,  right ? 
Hello Gloria ,  I'm Paulina ,  where you calling from  ? 
Ah  ? 
Mhm ,  and what is like  ? 
What  ? 
I was talking about religion ,  what is you opinion about it ,  if unites people ,  or separates them ,  if we all need to have the same religion or ,  what do i know  ? 
yes ,  yes ,  yes .  Like this ,  who've said ?  In my lunch time ,  the girls that I work with ,  where I work ,  three
What's religion is that ?  The one of your friend ? 
Mm ?  Where are you from ? 
Puerto Rican .  but raised in the United States ? 
If ,  you know ?  if you from Georgia ? 
Oh my God .  Yes .  yes .  It's a lot of work .  Right ?  I do ki  kid's parties .  I dress up as a clown and now I'm trying to think how to make an Elmo head . 
Ah ,  yes ? 
Have you been doing this for a long time ? 
Good evening ,  Fabiola says .  Who am I talking to ? 
This is Lliorno .  Of Philadelphia .  How are you ? 
Ah ,  how are you ? 
Good ,  thanks ,  and you ? 
yes on music opinion ,  what kind of music do you listen to ? 
do you like to dance ? 
Oh ,  I also did .  Now I dance when I am at home alone .  Are you married ? 
Ah ,  any children ? 
Do you have a favorite singer ? 
Oh ,  and where are you from ? 
and where are you from ? 
Is very good .  Do you have a cold ? 
Do you have a bit of a cold ? 
Where do you say ,  you are calling from ? 
Where do you call from ? 
Philadelphia ,  is that a city or an state ,  which ? 
This city is um .  .  are you in Washington ,  D . C or Washington state ? 
uhm hey ,  do you like Ricky Martin ? 
what ? 
Ricky Martin ? 
you have hear ? 
uh ? 
Do you know if he is good ? 
What music do they play ? 
have you hear them ? 
Ricardo Montaner ? 
Who ? 
How much ?  How much time have you been in the United States ? 
Five years and you speak English and everything ? 
Did you get your citizenship or not yet ? 
Oh ,  oh ,  do you speak Italian ? 
Ah they're not .  With the residency you're happy ?  your parents are
okay ,  are your grandparents ,  your uncles are in Italy ? 
Beautiful ,  ¿and do you have animals ,  dogs ,  cats or something ? 
Yeah ,  ¿do you have animals ? 
and do you have an idea of .  .  . of which dog would you like ? 
Good evening .  How are you ? 
yes ,  how are you ? 
Very well ,  my name is Carlos .  I'm from Houston ,  Texas ,  and you ? 
How are you doing ? 
Very well ,  very well .  What do you think about today's topic ? 
Okay .  Eh How old are you ? 
Okay .  Sorry ? 
And And you ? 
Pardon ? 
Live ?  Eh .  Like concerts ? 
Okay .  Eh ,  which type of music you like the most ? 
Do you dislike any music styles ? 
the ,  and the ,  you say you play instruments ,  eh ,  is you ,  your husband play ,  like in a band ,  or a group ? 
like i have ,  like and iPod  ,  you know wha iPod's are  ? 
Yes ? 
What ,  what are you studying ? 
and what other good things happened in your life ? 
why ?  Goods topics are good because you find good conversational topics when you talk here because they add music too .  There was music yesterday
but ,  eh ,  how it's called ?  ,  you mustn't talk about what they say to you
they are ,  and what are you doing to them that is making them laugh ? 
children are funny ,  ooh ,  they are growing .  And do you talk to them ? 
Do you have to talk to them now or not ? 
What ? 
if talk to them ,  do you talk to the children ? 
in English ? 
¿and where did she learn to speak ?  ,  ¿did she learn to speak when she was in Chile ?  ,  yes well
isn't that bad ? 
and you have planned what are you going to do for Christmas or thanksgiving ? 
for Christmas are you already planning the gifts and everything ? 
what ? 
the gifts are you planning for Christmas or not ? 
and you ? 
do you already have plans for Christmas ? 
for real ? 
and what type of car is it ? 
huh ? 
a karaoke  and do you play with it or not ? 
ehm ? 
Does the mouse have a calculator ? 
hey ? 
hey ?  I believe that´s a good idea . 
Are they going to be there for christmas ? 
but ,  she said that maybe no .  who knows why ? 
Oh um its the same thing i think ,  but how are we going to leave ,  if we recently bought this house ,  how ?  he says . 
huh ? 
huh ? 
and they are ?  are they the living room curtain ? 
Oh you haven't put on the outer window part ? 
Where are you calling from ? 
from where ? 
yes ,  Where are you from ? 
And you ? 
are you studying here in the United States ? 
And this young man heard that ,  that you live in the US ?  have you lived there all your life ? 
And now you are married with ,  is with Latin ,  or with an American ? 
sure ,  yes ,  it should be a lot more difficult ,  but ,  well I believe ,  well in the long term it is going to be very good also ,  no ?  that way you grow up with two languages and that is a strenght
Then you have ,  have taught even in high school or what  ? 
I imagine that you must have studied something like about Education or something like that no ? 
or what did you study ? 
marvelous things and maybe only one can't be selected true ? 
Uh um ,  your husband ,  you met him ¿where ? 
But ,  but it's nice ,  it's really nice ,  and then ,  ¿what's the best that has happened to you ,  your best memory ? 
where do you live ? 
yes but she will do it for sure .  What did you study ? 
Well my name is Claudia Ivette .   With whom do I have the pleasure ? 
my pleasure as well .   Where are you ? 
From where ,  what ? 
this is a place called Robert this .   And you where are you speaking from ? 
because if you say no ,  turn around ,  no ,  no ,  you must not see that ,  then a teenager or a kid will start thinking ,  ah ,  but why won't mom let me see that ? 
What's your name ? 
Joe ? 
yes ,  and what's your name ? 
Alex .  where are you from ? 
Where are you from again ? 
Well ,  and what do you think about tonight's topic ? 
obvious right ?   But ehm I think that the   R or ,  those days it is very stretched what is allowed or not .   Ehm ,  ehm ,  I agree that
many movies ,  right ?  that don't make any sense for example ,  there are many movies about gang members that that the gang members many gang members are the ones that go to see it because since
the society ,  the parents ,  the family has a lot to do in helping the children to understand those things and and how to  send them ,  right ?   And I with my daughter ,  I do not ,  when
Do you have teenagers ? 
and if he goes and have sex with this girl ,  well this are the consequences ,  this can happen to you ,  do you understand ? 
Well ,  i was thinking ,  dear mother ,  ¿how can it be ?  ,  hey ,  we got a very difficult subject today
¿Where are you from ? 
They twist the facts about what's happening and then I always find po  with people that ,  for example ,  tell me good heavens .  and what do you think about the mad man that you have for president ?  and
wanted to tell you was that ,  after they've said a bunch of outrageous stuff ,  no ? 
When you try to say something to the other person ,  look things are like this ,  don't you see ?  Then they say no ,  because you are
Right ,  that what they say to me sometimes ,  What are you doing here ? 
In ,  uh ,  at any given time ,  but that has nothing to do with the opposition ,  because ,  for example ,  ¿how many Venezuelan people don't live in Venezuela ?  ,  and what they're doing it's bashing
Because ,  ¿why are you here ?  ,  and well ,  maybe you would do the same ,  thank god that you're here ,  not in Venezuela . 
outstandingly high ,  that people cannot ,  uh ,  they don't protest ,  i say ,  oh my god ,  but ¿what's wrong with these people ?  ,  i mean
How ever ,  i tell you ,  i don't know ,  suddenly here .  ¿are you in ,  in Pennsylvania you told me ? 
Me too ,  me at first that there wasn't I didn't have access to that ,  that website I said ,  My god ,  is it true about they are saying about venezuela ?  but I talked with my friends
Of course ,  of course ,  and what are you doing there in Philadelphia ? 
Oh ,  and you think is better than Miami ? 
And wath we shall do ?  Job is first . 
But ,  how long you're in the United States ? 
Twelve ? 
Then ,  before I also see to Americans like the gringos ,  now I understand that no ,  they are americans that are from USA ,  because that is another wrong concept that is handles ¿isn't ?  then , 
why ?  Why ? 
Well my name is Ibet ,  with whom do I have the pleasure ? 
Hello Mercedes , how are you ?  Where are you from Mercedes ? 
Oh from Honduras ? 
Ah .  from where ? 
And you where are you from ? 
Ah .  from where  ?  The City eh , Capitol
What do you think of today's topic ?  That it is easier to break up with someone young or do age make a difference . 
And was there a time when you had a break up that was difficult ? 
eh I'm going to have three children I was placing my castles in the sky and when he came and said you know what ?  here no .  here it ends . 
What ? 
How great .  The best .  But for what ?  If you have trouble ,  you get trouble . 
And what about you ? 
Yes ,  and what's happening with you ? 
You are married now ? 
I think that it has to be the worst experience ,  I think ,  of your life it's ,  yes ,  and I hope ,  I hope it never happens because we don't know ,  right ? 
Yes ,  one always loves the person but it's impossible that it's only is peace ,  then that is what I'm saying ,  right ? 
Because one ,  well I ,  I am one ,  a human and one has to ,  things that very bother other people .  You know ?  And
yes ,  the truth  ,  I think that it is something of the truth ,  it is very difficult to maintain the appearance  that everything is happy fine ,  you know ?  but
that ,  really ,  you won't know her very depths ,  you know ?  until you are married to that person but that but that I think that I think that
the drama is ,  well ,  a lot ,  right ?  so then the people don't know how to go out and move on ,  right ?  that happens . 
And i told he ,  ¿what's with the glasses ?  ,  it was ,  well the day was cloudy ,  ¿right ?  ,  and she had a bruise because her boyfriend hit her . 
How is it going ,  Fabiola ?  How are you ?  Mm . 
Well .   And you ? 
Well ,  well .   Where are you ? 
In Washington ?  yes . 
And you ? 
From Maracaibo ? 
No ,  you know ,  know .   Why ,  do you know people from there ? 
Oh ,  yeah ,  yeah ,  Well ,  you know that they have a very strong accent No ?  Something like ,  look and you .  MN . 
look and you Are you arepa ? 
Mhm Oh Do you work at the Hilton ? 
Do you work ? 
Yes ,  Yes ,  Yes .  Now im ,  is in the oral part .  No ?  I'm in the other side of ,  of ,  Mm ,  of the ,  mm
and ?  talk ? 
But ,  definitively they are going to have that option ,  well .   That even in ,  eh ,  it is/ there are some parents who combine ,  sign language with the oral part .   No ?   Depending on , 
and what do you think about ,  about the subject they gave us today about  ? 
eh ,  sometimes it is a little difficult .   No ?  But ,  I think that love is the only thing that makes it possible to overcome barriers ,  nothing else . 
they can overcome ,  what do you think ? 
And ,  twelve ,  imagine that .  And ,  and we really have had ,  well ,  two critical moments ,  almost splitting .  And ,  and ,  there was a point where also maturity plays an important role there ,  ¿right ? 
ah ,  that is what I say ,  if I fall ,  I stand up again .  What is the problem ? 
Right ?  whatever ,  exactly .  Then ,  fortunately ,  well ,  eh ,  the first time it was horrible ,  because I thought it was the end of the world .  And ,  then we were for a long time without talking to each other until a day ,  I say ,  well ,  What is going on ? 
Hm ,  horrible ,  horrible ,  horrible .  I told him ,  look ,  You know what ?  it looks to me , 
hear me ,  not ,  terrible ,  a big tantrum on our part ,  really .  I told him Do you know ?  this looks to me like a big tantrum on our part . 
Let's get going .  Because ,  putting aside how serious the situation might be ,  it   fortnately it wasn't too serious ,  but ,  uh ,  seeing as neither of them wanted to twist anyone's arm ,  right ? 
Because   what are we going to do with a mediocre relationship ?  I don't want a mediocre rlationship .  As you yourself say ,  there are people who spent up to 30 years together ,  and that's a nasty relationship . 
Really ? 
It's that they treat each other badly .  This ,  look here ,  this piece of whatchamacallit ,  what   what is that ?  What do I want that for ? 
No ?  There is respect .  and , 
No ?  There are some that mention love .  If there is no love there is nothing . 
Of course .  Is your husband from Chile too ? 
You think it's easier ? 
And ,  that ,  that's what I said ? 
what did you say ?  Or when we are super b 
Hello ,  hello ,  how are you ? 
Oh ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  and you ? 
really ?  Me too . 
Really ? 
How long have you been living here ? 
and what is it called ,  and of course then would come and go but more less the ninety one ,  yes .   And you ? 
And and you ,  where are you from ? 
From Santiago as well ? 
And have you been here long in this thing ?   Of calling over the phone ? 
oh really ? 
Hello ? 
Yes ,  yes ,  and what can we do if that happens ? 
I thought ,  i thought that it was like this ,  this study ,  to do ,  ¿what's it called ?  ,  telephone menu's and stuff like that . 
Oh ,  ¿because you shouldn't or because you don't want to ? 
Right .  and do you like it here ? 
Oh ,  and why ? 
yes ,  okay .  But ,  do you have to drive your car a lot or do you use public transportation ? 
and how did you get there ? 
yeah ,  i married an american ,  that's how i got here ,  what about you ? 
oh really ? 
So then ,  you are single now ? 
okay ,  ah look ,  and and ,  what do you call it ,  do you like it or not ? 
Hi .  How are you ?  Mi name is Juan .  Marcela . 
yes ,  how are you ? 
I have not forgotten .  We practiced together ,  no ?  Yes .  Listen ,  But I am ,  it's time ,  health . 
Do you have social security here ?  Are you covered ? 
Is a problem right ? 
We are not covered .  Is a problem because ,  well something could always happen ,  right ? 
people in the community ,  right ? 
no ?  yes ,  he gave me some .  So ,  yes ,  it's something that we think should be more flexible ,  right ,  for the community ,  for a certain type of community
because of the demand and because people keep paying those prices ,  so costs go up because people ask for more and more money .  And then ,  people need more money ,  it's a vicious cycle .  So ,  how could they possibly create a more social medicine ? 
With that .  Because here ,  I don't know what it is like where you live .   But here ,  if anyone has money it's the nurses and the doctors .  Right ? 
So .  Mm .  And here ,  well like you say ,  you see a good car with a woman who is thirty years old ,  for example ,  no ? 
Yes ,  yes I uh uh .  Well here in this case well that is what is offered .  In Canada ,  I understand ,  well ,  they have a lot of medicine ,  right ? 
is expensive ,  no ?  And then I don't know how the medicines here are ,  in Mexico they are cheaper and is more like that
No ?  yes .  yes .  And here there's only one .  And second that in literature she's not the best .  And it is hey but only the laboratories ,  I thought that all of the North American laboratories well uh
Super strong interests in everything ,  no ? 
According to the specialty they have to operate over here .  Do you know what you would have to do ? 
Why don't you contact an organization that is called the Shriners ? 
yes I knew about that .  Listen ,  is our time up or what ? 
with the epilepsy ,  no ? 
no ?  After you know that always you are hoping that it doesn't happen .  Well ,  I don't know what what happens really no But then that trauma but to my poor son because he's a teenager then
Of course because on top of it it's embarrassing .   Look ,  how old is he ? 
How old is he ? 
Yes .   Also do you you know where you can find out ?  In teaching hospitals
go to people that don't ,  can't pay in the situation as one usually would ,  you see ?  Like we how can't go to a specialist because it costs a lot of money . 
Ah ,  Yea ? 
With the university Ah ? 
Mm .  Uh uh .  Therefore ,  they told me I needed to bring them information .  I had a letter from my admissions ,  etc ,  no ? 
No ?  Well I don't .  But ,  well now I have my own social security ,  my own . 
listen ,  fine everything is fine ,  what do you think about today's topic ? 
no ,  I did not listen to it ,  what is the topic ? 
and you consider the tecnology ,  no ?  your daily life ,  if it turns out to be more a problem than a solution or something like that . 
does that include automobile ,  cars ? 
is the same that ,  is the same that I was thinking ,  of course ,  it should be included ,  no ? 
yes because is a ,  you know ?  a machine
exactly ,  yes ,  but ,  I said well yes ,  the automobile seems to be the most important ,  no ?  is then I thought maybe is the computer ,  but no
aha ,  exactly but sometimes ,  eh ,  what seems like a more personal element depending on the case ,  then it can be the car ,  no ?  because the computer is now every time more just another tool
then more than ,  than ,  sometimes ,  lets say that it is part of the institution where you are found ,  no ?  is more like a working tool
but a very personal tool seems to the car ,  no ? 
because you have to take care of the car and you know ? 
did you use horses more ? 
no ?  it is like a horse ,  it is something very personal very close
eh what allows communications and all that no ? 
you all need a car you know ?  to work
exactly and here the working people have ,  like in those times a like a mule no ?  need a pick up a truck pick up
pick up truck , no ?  and go and give ,  and for it not to leave yoy ,  then it is you can tell like there is a culture for hard work very important
and the computers ,  good ,  well all the houses there is television ,  telephone and computers practically ,  no ?  but ,  but how are there other dimensions no ?  of the technological question ,  then the auto appears to be
ah ,  what what tecnological question ,  is technology important in your life ?  what is that we are discussing right now if it had to be the auto or if it had to be the computer ?  what you do you opine ? 
because you know ?  because i have my cellphone and I am always with it
and ,  well I have become used to having a cellphone ,  you know ? 
I'm always returning to my house for ,  for ,  you know ?  see my messages
and well ,  the computer had the messages ,  it always had internet ,  e mail messaging more than the cellphone ,  no cellphone nothing ,  no ? 
more physical right ?  ,  then the care becomes the most important instrument ,  and the computer ,  well ,  it goes to a second instance ,  but it is also important ,  right ? 
is more a problem that a help ,  but obviously ,  you know ?  ,  obviously
oh really ? 
But also in the city ,  I think ,  and the most import .  .  .  ,  well ,  according to the job ,  it might be the computer ,  right ?  then
we .  .  what type of problems can you have ,  no ?  as you just said ,  with the car ,  the problems that have to do with parking
no ?  here in Texas no ,  there is not ,  where I am there are not many problems ,  no ?  with parking there is a lot of space everywhere ,  no ,  it hasn't presented yet
of transportation ,  no ?  for example
aha ,  but ,  don't you think that also ,  it is like wonderful that that it has changed in like sixty years ? 
charged the development costs ,  you understand ?  I don't know how to explain it well but
exactly yes ,  but as they also say ,  with the car industry ,  no ?  if the car industry had advanced technologically as much as the electronics industry perhaps cars could transport us with
no ?  and instead of costing twenty thousand dollars ,  they would be costing two thousand dollars
If that's the case ,  no ?  but technology ,  that industry at best ,   has its own interests and it's as if it doesn't advance no ?  you heard what they are saying about the hybrids
no ?  no I don't think they have a real real ,  that they it is really an important change in technology given its efficency
Pardon me ? 
no ,  no I don't think it is so important at the same time the efficiency they show es radically different than that of other cars it is too little .  no ?  you see that's what I say
yes ,  that's right ,  sure ,  but at the same time ,  for example ,  these cars ,  the small cars ,  they have the same performance as the hybrid cars ,  and they are not hybrids ,  no ? 
it's cheaper that a normal car ,  a good economical car ,  right ? 
and ,  why is that ? 
why are the United States one of the only countries to have this ,  why do we have this huge cars ,  you know ? 
How are you ? 
Well ,  and you ?  How is the weather our there in you home ? 
Because we are ugly ,  we are cold .  How are the movies ?  Had we already spoken about this issue ? 
Is because you let him and thought that is okay .  Isn't that right  ? 
eh ,  did you read the rules to the game on the telephone ? 
I was asking myself ,  ah ,  how is this ?  are you already preparing for Christmas ? 
¿And what what did you buy to Miranda ? 
No ,  ¿who ? 
Yeah ,  that's true ,  ¿who ? 
Tamara ,  how are you ? 
good good ,  where are you ? 
yeah ,  yeah you got me out of base ,  but do you have time participating in this ? 
Did you get the same email ?  right ? It will apparently continue ,  that's what i understood in the email i received . 
So what you think of about what they put in the movies ? 
Watch movies that are in uh ,  what do you call this ?  ,  Lost festivals ,  here is an example the recently completed International Latin American Film Festival
pid ,  so dumb that i felt annoyed to be there ,  and well ,  what are we doing here ?  ,  why I'm wasting my time ? 
What are we doing ?  I mean ,  I prefer going to sleep that to watch those thins ,  but there are movies that have
Yes ,  it's like ,  "Well ,  we have to make 10 movies ,  let's make them ,  how ?  ,  when ?  ,  it doesn't matter"
As they role as we said .  Where are you from ? 
We say like this ,  "a lo Macho" ,  ¿right ?  ,  like ,  well ,  yeah make movies ,  whatever ,  but yeah there are some good and others ,  well ,  they're not but
but then they repeated it ,  and repeated it ,  and repated it .  ¡Oh my God .  ,  ¿What's this ?  ,  we're paying for this ,  so it's like a annoying ,  we're annoyed with
Hey weren't you and I by there this morning ?  I don't remember looking nothing like that there . 
It was there and people were protesting that ¿why didn't the current president do something to remember the victims there ? 
Tell me ? 
Hi Fernanda ,  how are you ?  My name is Claudia . 
Where are you speak  ?  Good .  From where are you speaking ? 
Ah ,  which one of the two ? 
Ah ,  yes because ,  after ,  I think there two no ? 
And you ,  where are you ? 
and i think that the americans ,  like um ,  their morals have lowered ,  do you understand ?  so
but for example ,  i had cable for a little while ,  and sometimes like ,  what at like ?  ten in the morning ,  and i like changing channels . 
because ,  can happen ,  let's say at ten at night and the programs that they sure are never ,  you don't run the risk ,  no ?  that they are as bad as here .   Here
ah ,  yes ? 
what they watch .   no ?  in that respect .   But ,  uf
that if we keep going like that maybe until Disney is going to be porno right ?  so
because sometimes even they draw her ,  i don't know i have seen the commercials  so you dont afraid because your big no ?  but
i am getting use to it myself do you understand me ?  we say
Maybe  Mariza ,  we talked a few days ago ,  I believe ,  right ? 
to provide an answer .   And it ends up being a form of control ,  right ? 
for real ? 
No , terrible they said Because it is harrassing to teachers that teach the bible ,  to explain world creation ? 
Yes well ,  but in this case ,  to accept the differences looks like something that relates to a matter of humanity ,  right ? 
In this country ,  they are so fundamentalists ,  right ? 
right ,  and you have ,  practically some religion in particular ? 
OH ,  How are you Carolina ?  Your are speaking with Alex
How are you Alex ? 
Where are you from ? 
and you ? 
Colombian ? 
mma  ,  many things and ,  and I don't like to wait for the ,  the pages ,  you get me ? 
¿And you ? 
the most essential ,  and mostly ,  uh ,  and the new technologies ,  ¿right ?  ,  the new technology that has come out and every day new things come out ,  ¿right ? 
write forms and documents ,  and everything ,  now everything is done through the computer and the interer ,  ¿right ?  ,  so ,  it's something wonderful
To me ,  it's essential ,  i think i don't know what i could do without the computer ,  ¿right ?  ,  so ,  I'm really happy with this new technology ,  and i wish it keeps
going forward more every day ,  ¿right ? 
some information ,  well ,  i sit on the computer and no one can stop me ,  that when it's like ,  an essential part of your life ,  ¿right ? 
Sure ,  how many calls have you made ? 
But ,  do they make the payment once you finish the twenty five calls ,  or not ? 
Oh ,  really ? 
Oh ,  uh ,  ¿do you know the owner ? 
Oh ,  he's from ,  ¿is he from California ? 
Oh ,  ¿but do you know him in person ? 
Oh ,  yeah ,  oh ,  ¿yeah ?  ,  oh ,  no ,  i have never spoken to him ,  i . 
Oh ,  this one is your second ,  oh ,  yes ? 
Okay ,  Okay Ah and the other one was the same ,  twenty five calls ? 
Okay and they paid you the same also ? 
And what technology do you use more ?  This is what we are doing now is technology . 
back in time it was really expensive ,  do you remember ?  ,  For calling your country
Now is cheaper ,  right ? 
And why is that ?  ,  Technology
and I had to be very careful cause they used to be with forward clock ,  no  ? 
yes ,  I've had it .  The truth is that for ten years I've been wihing for the technologies to advance .  No  ? 
Because it has to be advanced ,  no  ? 
Do you understand me  ? 
They have to look for cures like ah ,  cancer eh ,  if you can go to the moon ,  why can't they find a cure for cancer ?  yes it can be ,  yes they can do a
Super fast computer that can think ,  why can't they find a cure to cancer ? 
its true ,  how many years has cancer been around for ? 
Yea ,  how many people ,  right ?  does it kill . 
and there's no cure ,  right ?  they cant find one ,  right ? 
right ?  and that shortens a lot of peoples lives
have you ever heard about a new cure for cancer ? 
I wish ,  right ?  ,  i wish that there's something ,  that God enlightens them ,  so that they can find something that can ,  uh ,  cure this catastrophe that cancer is ,  no matter how old you are ,  but that gets to you ,  right ? 
Oh my god ,  ¿in three days ?  ,  oh . 
Right .  And they couldn't do anything about it ,  right ? 
how are you ,  eh I'm guillermo ,  how are you ? 
yeah ,  yeah what about you ? 
oh ,  what are you studying ? 
What university ? 
And you what's ,  what are you studying ? 
Then ,  business ,  yes ,  but ,  then you're studying a PhD ,  a Master's ,  what is it exactly ? 
Sorry ? 
you live in Peru ,  then ? 
I ,  sorry ,  what did you say ? 
Do you live in Peru ? 
Instead of a ,  exchange student ,  for example ,  ¿right ? 
Oh ,  good .  ¿And what do you think so far ? 
¿More than in Perú ? 
I ,  I ,  I'll decide to take less courses ,  I don't know .  How many courses do you take more or less per cycle ? 
or are you dedicated full time to ,  to your studies ? 
Ah ,  I used to do that sometimes but ,  which one are you on ,  which part of the library ?  In
And you ,  where do you work ? 
Where's that ? 
ah ,  in England for example ? 
each one has its system it has its advantages .   But ,  in ,  and in Peru ,  how is it ,  in general ? 
And they are just personal tasks or group ones ? 
how come ? 
too  too cold here ,  right ? 
Hello Gloria ,  I'm Paulina ,  where you calling from  ? 
Ah  ? 
Mhm ,  and what is like  ? 
What  ? 
I was talking about religion ,  what is you opinion about it ,  if unites people ,  or separates them ,  if we all need to have the same religion or ,  what do i know  ? 
yes ,  yes ,  yes .  Like this ,  who've said ?  In my lunch time ,  the girls that I work with ,  where I work ,  three
What's religion is that ?  The one of your friend ? 
Mm ?  Where are you from ? 
Puerto Rican .  but raised in the United States ? 
If ,  you know ?  if you from Georgia ? 
Oh my God .  Yes .  yes .  It's a lot of work .  Right ?  I do ki  kid's parties .  I dress up as a clown and now I'm trying to think how to make an Elmo head . 
Ah ,  yes ? 
Have you been doing this for a long time ? 
Good evening ,  Fabiola says .  Who am I talking to ? 
This is Lliorno .  Of Philadelphia .  How are you ? 
Ah ,  how are you ? 
Good ,  thanks ,  and you ? 
yes on music opinion ,  what kind of music do you listen to ? 
do you like to dance ? 
Oh ,  I also did .  Now I dance when I am at home alone .  Are you married ? 
Ah ,  any children ? 
Do you have a favorite singer ? 
Oh ,  and where are you from ? 
and where are you from ? 
Is very good .  Do you have a cold ? 
Do you have a bit of a cold ? 
Where do you say ,  you are calling from ? 
Where do you call from ? 
Philadelphia ,  is that a city or an state ,  which ? 
This city is um .  .  are you in Washington ,  D . C or Washington state ? 
uhm hey ,  do you like Ricky Martin ? 
what ? 
Ricky Martin ? 
you have hear ? 
uh ? 
Do you know if he is good ? 
What music do they play ? 
have you hear them ? 
Ricardo Montaner ? 
Who ? 
How much ?  How much time have you been in the United States ? 
Five years and you speak English and everything ? 
Did you get your citizenship or not yet ? 
Oh ,  oh ,  do you speak Italian ? 
Ah they're not .  With the residency you're happy ?  your parents are
okay ,  are your grandparents ,  your uncles are in Italy ? 
Beautiful ,  ¿and do you have animals ,  dogs ,  cats or something ? 
Yeah ,  ¿do you have animals ? 
and do you have an idea of .  .  . of which dog would you like ? 
Good evening .  How are you ? 
yes ,  how are you ? 
Very well ,  my name is Carlos .  I'm from Houston ,  Texas ,  and you ? 
How are you doing ? 
Very well ,  very well .  What do you think about today's topic ? 
Okay .  Eh How old are you ? 
Okay .  Sorry ? 
And And you ? 
Pardon ? 
Live ?  Eh .  Like concerts ? 
Okay .  Eh ,  which type of music you like the most ? 
Do you dislike any music styles ? 
the ,  and the ,  you say you play instruments ,  eh ,  is you ,  your husband play ,  like in a band ,  or a group ? 
like i have ,  like and iPod  ,  you know wha iPod's are  ? 
Yes ? 
What ,  what are you studying ? 
and what other good things happened in your life ? 
why ?  Goods topics are good because you find good conversational topics when you talk here because they add music too .  There was music yesterday
but ,  eh ,  how it's called ?  ,  you mustn't talk about what they say to you
they are ,  and what are you doing to them that is making them laugh ? 
children are funny ,  ooh ,  they are growing .  And do you talk to them ? 
Do you have to talk to them now or not ? 
What ? 
if talk to them ,  do you talk to the children ? 
in English ? 
¿and where did she learn to speak ?  ,  ¿did she learn to speak when she was in Chile ?  ,  yes well
isn't that bad ? 
and you have planned what are you going to do for Christmas or thanksgiving ? 
for Christmas are you already planning the gifts and everything ? 
what ? 
the gifts are you planning for Christmas or not ? 
and you ? 
do you already have plans for Christmas ? 
for real ? 
and what type of car is it ? 
huh ? 
a karaoke  and do you play with it or not ? 
ehm ? 
Does the mouse have a calculator ? 
hey ? 
hey ?  I believe that´s a good idea . 
Are they going to be there for christmas ? 
but ,  she said that maybe no .  who knows why ? 
Oh um its the same thing i think ,  but how are we going to leave ,  if we recently bought this house ,  how ?  he says . 
huh ? 
huh ? 
and they are ?  are they the living room curtain ? 
Oh you haven't put on the outer window part ? 
Where are you calling from ? 
from where ? 
yes ,  Where are you from ? 
And you ? 
are you studying here in the United States ? 
And this young man heard that ,  that you live in the US ?  have you lived there all your life ? 
And now you are married with ,  is with Latin ,  or with an American ? 
sure ,  yes ,  it should be a lot more difficult ,  but ,  well I believe ,  well in the long term it is going to be very good also ,  no ?  that way you grow up with two languages and that is a strenght
Then you have ,  have taught even in high school or what  ? 
I imagine that you must have studied something like about Education or something like that no ? 
or what did you study ? 
marvelous things and maybe only one can't be selected true ? 
Uh um ,  your husband ,  you met him ¿where ? 
But ,  but it's nice ,  it's really nice ,  and then ,  ¿what's the best that has happened to you ,  your best memory ? 
where do you live ? 
yes but she will do it for sure .  What did you study ? 
Well my name is Claudia Ivette .   With whom do I have the pleasure ? 
my pleasure as well .   Where are you ? 
From where ,  what ? 
this is a place called Robert this .   And you where are you speaking from ? 
because if you say no ,  turn around ,  no ,  no ,  you must not see that ,  then a teenager or a kid will start thinking ,  ah ,  but why won't mom let me see that ? 
What's your name ? 
Joe ? 
yes ,  and what's your name ? 
Alex .  where are you from ? 
Where are you from again ? 
Well ,  and what do you think about tonight's topic ? 
obvious right ?   But ehm I think that the   R or ,  those days it is very stretched what is allowed or not .   Ehm ,  ehm ,  I agree that
many movies ,  right ?  that don't make any sense for example ,  there are many movies about gang members that that the gang members many gang members are the ones that go to see it because since
the society ,  the parents ,  the family has a lot to do in helping the children to understand those things and and how to  send them ,  right ?   And I with my daughter ,  I do not ,  when
Do you have teenagers ? 
and if he goes and have sex with this girl ,  well this are the consequences ,  this can happen to you ,  do you understand ? 
Well ,  i was thinking ,  dear mother ,  ¿how can it be ?  ,  hey ,  we got a very difficult subject today
¿Where are you from ? 
They twist the facts about what's happening and then I always find po  with people that ,  for example ,  tell me good heavens .  and what do you think about the mad man that you have for president ?  and
wanted to tell you was that ,  after they've said a bunch of outrageous stuff ,  no ? 
When you try to say something to the other person ,  look things are like this ,  don't you see ?  Then they say no ,  because you are
Right ,  that what they say to me sometimes ,  What are you doing here ? 
In ,  uh ,  at any given time ,  but that has nothing to do with the opposition ,  because ,  for example ,  ¿how many Venezuelan people don't live in Venezuela ?  ,  and what they're doing it's bashing
Because ,  ¿why are you here ?  ,  and well ,  maybe you would do the same ,  thank god that you're here ,  not in Venezuela . 
outstandingly high ,  that people cannot ,  uh ,  they don't protest ,  i say ,  oh my god ,  but ¿what's wrong with these people ?  ,  i mean
How ever ,  i tell you ,  i don't know ,  suddenly here .  ¿are you in ,  in Pennsylvania you told me ? 
Me too ,  me at first that there wasn't I didn't have access to that ,  that website I said ,  My god ,  is it true about they are saying about venezuela ?  but I talked with my friends
Of course ,  of course ,  and what are you doing there in Philadelphia ? 
Oh ,  and you think is better than Miami ? 
And wath we shall do ?  Job is first . 
But ,  how long you're in the United States ? 
Twelve ? 
Then ,  before I also see to Americans like the gringos ,  now I understand that no ,  they are americans that are from USA ,  because that is another wrong concept that is handles ¿isn't ?  then , 
why ?  Why ? 
Well my name is Ibet ,  with whom do I have the pleasure ? 
Hello Mercedes , how are you ?  Where are you from Mercedes ? 
Oh from Honduras ? 
Ah .  from where ? 
And you where are you from ? 
Ah .  from where  ?  The City eh , Capitol
What do you think of today's topic ?  That it is easier to break up with someone young or do age make a difference . 
And was there a time when you had a break up that was difficult ? 
eh I'm going to have three children I was placing my castles in the sky and when he came and said you know what ?  here no .  here it ends . 
What ? 
How great .  The best .  But for what ?  If you have trouble ,  you get trouble . 
And what about you ? 
Yes ,  and what's happening with you ? 
You are married now ? 
I think that it has to be the worst experience ,  I think ,  of your life it's ,  yes ,  and I hope ,  I hope it never happens because we don't know ,  right ? 
Yes ,  one always loves the person but it's impossible that it's only is peace ,  then that is what I'm saying ,  right ? 
Because one ,  well I ,  I am one ,  a human and one has to ,  things that very bother other people .  You know ?  And
yes ,  the truth  ,  I think that it is something of the truth ,  it is very difficult to maintain the appearance  that everything is happy fine ,  you know ?  but
that ,  really ,  you won't know her very depths ,  you know ?  until you are married to that person but that but that I think that I think that
the drama is ,  well ,  a lot ,  right ?  so then the people don't know how to go out and move on ,  right ?  that happens . 
And i told he ,  ¿what's with the glasses ?  ,  it was ,  well the day was cloudy ,  ¿right ?  ,  and she had a bruise because her boyfriend hit her . 
How is it going ,  Fabiola ?  How are you ?  Mm . 
Well .   And you ? 
Well ,  well .   Where are you ? 
In Washington ?  yes . 
And you ? 
From Maracaibo ? 
No ,  you know ,  know .   Why ,  do you know people from there ? 
Oh ,  yeah ,  yeah ,  Well ,  you know that they have a very strong accent No ?  Something like ,  look and you .  MN . 
look and you Are you arepa ? 
Mhm Oh Do you work at the Hilton ? 
Do you work ? 
Yes ,  Yes ,  Yes .  Now im ,  is in the oral part .  No ?  I'm in the other side of ,  of ,  Mm ,  of the ,  mm
and ?  talk ? 
But ,  definitively they are going to have that option ,  well .   That even in ,  eh ,  it is/ there are some parents who combine ,  sign language with the oral part .   No ?   Depending on , 
and what do you think about ,  about the subject they gave us today about  ? 
eh ,  sometimes it is a little difficult .   No ?  But ,  I think that love is the only thing that makes it possible to overcome barriers ,  nothing else . 
they can overcome ,  what do you think ? 
And ,  twelve ,  imagine that .  And ,  and we really have had ,  well ,  two critical moments ,  almost splitting .  And ,  and ,  there was a point where also maturity plays an important role there ,  ¿right ? 
ah ,  that is what I say ,  if I fall ,  I stand up again .  What is the problem ? 
Right ?  whatever ,  exactly .  Then ,  fortunately ,  well ,  eh ,  the first time it was horrible ,  because I thought it was the end of the world .  And ,  then we were for a long time without talking to each other until a day ,  I say ,  well ,  What is going on ? 
Hm ,  horrible ,  horrible ,  horrible .  I told him ,  look ,  You know what ?  it looks to me , 
hear me ,  not ,  terrible ,  a big tantrum on our part ,  really .  I told him Do you know ?  this looks to me like a big tantrum on our part . 
Let's get going .  Because ,  putting aside how serious the situation might be ,  it   fortnately it wasn't too serious ,  but ,  uh ,  seeing as neither of them wanted to twist anyone's arm ,  right ? 
Because   what are we going to do with a mediocre relationship ?  I don't want a mediocre rlationship .  As you yourself say ,  there are people who spent up to 30 years together ,  and that's a nasty relationship . 
Really ? 
It's that they treat each other badly .  This ,  look here ,  this piece of whatchamacallit ,  what   what is that ?  What do I want that for ? 
No ?  There is respect .  and , 
No ?  There are some that mention love .  If there is no love there is nothing . 
Of course .  Is your husband from Chile too ? 
You think it's easier ? 
And ,  that ,  that's what I said ? 
what did you say ?  Or when we are super b 
Hello ,  hello ,  how are you ? 
Oh ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  and you ? 
really ?  Me too . 
Really ? 
How long have you been living here ? 
and what is it called ,  and of course then would come and go but more less the ninety one ,  yes .   And you ? 
And and you ,  where are you from ? 
From Santiago as well ? 
And have you been here long in this thing ?   Of calling over the phone ? 
oh really ? 
Hello ? 
Yes ,  yes ,  and what can we do if that happens ? 
I thought ,  i thought that it was like this ,  this study ,  to do ,  ¿what's it called ?  ,  telephone menu's and stuff like that . 
Oh ,  ¿because you shouldn't or because you don't want to ? 
Right .  and do you like it here ? 
Oh ,  and why ? 
yes ,  okay .  But ,  do you have to drive your car a lot or do you use public transportation ? 
and how did you get there ? 
yeah ,  i married an american ,  that's how i got here ,  what about you ? 
oh really ? 
So then ,  you are single now ? 
okay ,  ah look ,  and and ,  what do you call it ,  do you like it or not ? 
Hi .  How are you ?  Mi name is Juan .  Marcela . 
yes ,  how are you ? 
I have not forgotten .  We practiced together ,  no ?  Yes .  Listen ,  But I am ,  it's time ,  health . 
Do you have social security here ?  Are you covered ? 
Is a problem right ? 
We are not covered .  Is a problem because ,  well something could always happen ,  right ? 
people in the community ,  right ? 
no ?  yes ,  he gave me some .  So ,  yes ,  it's something that we think should be more flexible ,  right ,  for the community ,  for a certain type of community
because of the demand and because people keep paying those prices ,  so costs go up because people ask for more and more money .  And then ,  people need more money ,  it's a vicious cycle .  So ,  how could they possibly create a more social medicine ? 
With that .  Because here ,  I don't know what it is like where you live .   But here ,  if anyone has money it's the nurses and the doctors .  Right ? 
So .  Mm .  And here ,  well like you say ,  you see a good car with a woman who is thirty years old ,  for example ,  no ? 
Yes ,  yes I uh uh .  Well here in this case well that is what is offered .  In Canada ,  I understand ,  well ,  they have a lot of medicine ,  right ? 
is expensive ,  no ?  And then I don't know how the medicines here are ,  in Mexico they are cheaper and is more like that
No ?  yes .  yes .  And here there's only one .  And second that in literature she's not the best .  And it is hey but only the laboratories ,  I thought that all of the North American laboratories well uh
Super strong interests in everything ,  no ? 
According to the specialty they have to operate over here .  Do you know what you would have to do ? 
Why don't you contact an organization that is called the Shriners ? 
yes I knew about that .  Listen ,  is our time up or what ? 
with the epilepsy ,  no ? 
no ?  After you know that always you are hoping that it doesn't happen .  Well ,  I don't know what what happens really no But then that trauma but to my poor son because he's a teenager then
Of course because on top of it it's embarrassing .   Look ,  how old is he ? 
How old is he ? 
Yes .   Also do you you know where you can find out ?  In teaching hospitals
go to people that don't ,  can't pay in the situation as one usually would ,  you see ?  Like we how can't go to a specialist because it costs a lot of money . 
Ah ,  Yea ? 
With the university Ah ? 
Mm .  Uh uh .  Therefore ,  they told me I needed to bring them information .  I had a letter from my admissions ,  etc ,  no ? 
No ?  Well I don't .  But ,  well now I have my own social security ,  my own . 
listen ,  fine everything is fine ,  what do you think about today's topic ? 
no ,  I did not listen to it ,  what is the topic ? 
and you consider the tecnology ,  no ?  your daily life ,  if it turns out to be more a problem than a solution or something like that . 
does that include automobile ,  cars ? 
is the same that ,  is the same that I was thinking ,  of course ,  it should be included ,  no ? 
yes because is a ,  you know ?  a machine
exactly ,  yes ,  but ,  I said well yes ,  the automobile seems to be the most important ,  no ?  is then I thought maybe is the computer ,  but no
aha ,  exactly but sometimes ,  eh ,  what seems like a more personal element depending on the case ,  then it can be the car ,  no ?  because the computer is now every time more just another tool
then more than ,  than ,  sometimes ,  lets say that it is part of the institution where you are found ,  no ?  is more like a working tool
but a very personal tool seems to the car ,  no ? 
because you have to take care of the car and you know ? 
did you use horses more ? 
no ?  it is like a horse ,  it is something very personal very close
eh what allows communications and all that no ? 
you all need a car you know ?  to work
exactly and here the working people have ,  like in those times a like a mule no ?  need a pick up a truck pick up
pick up truck , no ?  and go and give ,  and for it not to leave yoy ,  then it is you can tell like there is a culture for hard work very important
and the computers ,  good ,  well all the houses there is television ,  telephone and computers practically ,  no ?  but ,  but how are there other dimensions no ?  of the technological question ,  then the auto appears to be
ah ,  what what tecnological question ,  is technology important in your life ?  what is that we are discussing right now if it had to be the auto or if it had to be the computer ?  what you do you opine ? 
because you know ?  because i have my cellphone and I am always with it
and ,  well I have become used to having a cellphone ,  you know ? 
I'm always returning to my house for ,  for ,  you know ?  see my messages
and well ,  the computer had the messages ,  it always had internet ,  e mail messaging more than the cellphone ,  no cellphone nothing ,  no ? 
more physical right ?  ,  then the care becomes the most important instrument ,  and the computer ,  well ,  it goes to a second instance ,  but it is also important ,  right ? 
is more a problem that a help ,  but obviously ,  you know ?  ,  obviously
oh really ? 
But also in the city ,  I think ,  and the most import .  .  .  ,  well ,  according to the job ,  it might be the computer ,  right ?  then
we .  .  what type of problems can you have ,  no ?  as you just said ,  with the car ,  the problems that have to do with parking
no ?  here in Texas no ,  there is not ,  where I am there are not many problems ,  no ?  with parking there is a lot of space everywhere ,  no ,  it hasn't presented yet
of transportation ,  no ?  for example
aha ,  but ,  don't you think that also ,  it is like wonderful that that it has changed in like sixty years ? 
charged the development costs ,  you understand ?  I don't know how to explain it well but
exactly yes ,  but as they also say ,  with the car industry ,  no ?  if the car industry had advanced technologically as much as the electronics industry perhaps cars could transport us with
no ?  and instead of costing twenty thousand dollars ,  they would be costing two thousand dollars
If that's the case ,  no ?  but technology ,  that industry at best ,   has its own interests and it's as if it doesn't advance no ?  you heard what they are saying about the hybrids
no ?  no I don't think they have a real real ,  that they it is really an important change in technology given its efficency
Pardon me ? 
no ,  no I don't think it is so important at the same time the efficiency they show es radically different than that of other cars it is too little .  no ?  you see that's what I say
yes ,  that's right ,  sure ,  but at the same time ,  for example ,  these cars ,  the small cars ,  they have the same performance as the hybrid cars ,  and they are not hybrids ,  no ? 
it's cheaper that a normal car ,  a good economical car ,  right ? 
and ,  why is that ? 
why are the United States one of the only countries to have this ,  why do we have this huge cars ,  you know ? 
How are you ? 
Well ,  and you ?  How is the weather our there in you home ? 
Because we are ugly ,  we are cold .  How are the movies ?  Had we already spoken about this issue ? 
Is because you let him and thought that is okay .  Isn't that right  ? 
eh ,  did you read the rules to the game on the telephone ? 
I was asking myself ,  ah ,  how is this ?  are you already preparing for Christmas ? 
¿And what what did you buy to Miranda ? 
No ,  ¿who ? 
Yeah ,  that's true ,  ¿who ? 
Tamara ,  how are you ? 
good good ,  where are you ? 
yeah ,  yeah you got me out of base ,  but do you have time participating in this ? 
Did you get the same email ?  right ? It will apparently continue ,  that's what i understood in the email i received . 
So what you think of about what they put in the movies ? 
Watch movies that are in uh ,  what do you call this ?  ,  Lost festivals ,  here is an example the recently completed International Latin American Film Festival
pid ,  so dumb that i felt annoyed to be there ,  and well ,  what are we doing here ?  ,  why I'm wasting my time ? 
What are we doing ?  I mean ,  I prefer going to sleep that to watch those thins ,  but there are movies that have
Yes ,  it's like ,  "Well ,  we have to make 10 movies ,  let's make them ,  how ?  ,  when ?  ,  it doesn't matter"
As they role as we said .  Where are you from ? 
We say like this ,  "a lo Macho" ,  ¿right ?  ,  like ,  well ,  yeah make movies ,  whatever ,  but yeah there are some good and others ,  well ,  they're not but
but then they repeated it ,  and repeated it ,  and repated it .  ¡Oh my God .  ,  ¿What's this ?  ,  we're paying for this ,  so it's like a annoying ,  we're annoyed with
Hey weren't you and I by there this morning ?  I don't remember looking nothing like that there . 
It was there and people were protesting that ¿why didn't the current president do something to remember the victims there ? 
Tell me ? 
Hi Fernanda ,  how are you ?  My name is Claudia . 
Where are you speak  ?  Good .  From where are you speaking ? 
Ah ,  which one of the two ? 
Ah ,  yes because ,  after ,  I think there two no ? 
And you ,  where are you ? 
and i think that the americans ,  like um ,  their morals have lowered ,  do you understand ?  so
but for example ,  i had cable for a little while ,  and sometimes like ,  what at like ?  ten in the morning ,  and i like changing channels . 
because ,  can happen ,  let's say at ten at night and the programs that they sure are never ,  you don't run the risk ,  no ?  that they are as bad as here .   Here
ah ,  yes ? 
what they watch .   no ?  in that respect .   But ,  uf
that if we keep going like that maybe until Disney is going to be porno right ?  so
because sometimes even they draw her ,  i don't know i have seen the commercials  so you dont afraid because your big no ?  but
i am getting use to it myself do you understand me ?  we say
Maybe  Mariza ,  we talked a few days ago ,  I believe ,  right ? 
to provide an answer .   And it ends up being a form of control ,  right ? 
for real ? 
No , terrible they said Because it is harrassing to teachers that teach the bible ,  to explain world creation ? 
Yes well ,  but in this case ,  to accept the differences looks like something that relates to a matter of humanity ,  right ? 
In this country ,  they are so fundamentalists ,  right ? 
right ,  and you have ,  practically some religion in particular ? 
OH ,  How are you Carolina ?  Your are speaking with Alex
How are you Alex ? 
Where are you from ? 
and you ? 
Colombian ? 
mma  ,  many things and ,  and I don't like to wait for the ,  the pages ,  you get me ? 
¿And you ? 
the most essential ,  and mostly ,  uh ,  and the new technologies ,  ¿right ?  ,  the new technology that has come out and every day new things come out ,  ¿right ? 
write forms and documents ,  and everything ,  now everything is done through the computer and the interer ,  ¿right ?  ,  so ,  it's something wonderful
To me ,  it's essential ,  i think i don't know what i could do without the computer ,  ¿right ?  ,  so ,  I'm really happy with this new technology ,  and i wish it keeps
going forward more every day ,  ¿right ? 
some information ,  well ,  i sit on the computer and no one can stop me ,  that when it's like ,  an essential part of your life ,  ¿right ? 
Sure ,  how many calls have you made ? 
But ,  do they make the payment once you finish the twenty five calls ,  or not ? 
Oh ,  really ? 
Oh ,  uh ,  ¿do you know the owner ? 
Oh ,  he's from ,  ¿is he from California ? 
Oh ,  ¿but do you know him in person ? 
Oh ,  yeah ,  oh ,  ¿yeah ?  ,  oh ,  no ,  i have never spoken to him ,  i . 
Oh ,  this one is your second ,  oh ,  yes ? 
Okay ,  Okay Ah and the other one was the same ,  twenty five calls ? 
Okay and they paid you the same also ? 
And what technology do you use more ?  This is what we are doing now is technology . 
back in time it was really expensive ,  do you remember ?  ,  For calling your country
Now is cheaper ,  right ? 
And why is that ?  ,  Technology
and I had to be very careful cause they used to be with forward clock ,  no  ? 
yes ,  I've had it .  The truth is that for ten years I've been wihing for the technologies to advance .  No  ? 
Because it has to be advanced ,  no  ? 
Do you understand me  ? 
They have to look for cures like ah ,  cancer eh ,  if you can go to the moon ,  why can't they find a cure for cancer ?  yes it can be ,  yes they can do a
Super fast computer that can think ,  why can't they find a cure to cancer ? 
its true ,  how many years has cancer been around for ? 
Yea ,  how many people ,  right ?  does it kill . 
and there's no cure ,  right ?  they cant find one ,  right ? 
right ?  and that shortens a lot of peoples lives
have you ever heard about a new cure for cancer ? 
I wish ,  right ?  ,  i wish that there's something ,  that God enlightens them ,  so that they can find something that can ,  uh ,  cure this catastrophe that cancer is ,  no matter how old you are ,  but that gets to you ,  right ? 
Oh my god ,  ¿in three days ?  ,  oh . 
Right .  And they couldn't do anything about it ,  right ? 
