And what are you studying
but you live in Peru then
More than in Peru
hello
How
She was talking about religion what is the opinion on , religion ? if it unifies people or if it keeps them apart , if . all should belong to the same religion or what do I know
I dont like her I say to her that we all are , created , like . God And we start the fight Then I say Look I want peace why do all this happens why dont we talk about
yes You _ You have always been from Georgia
You know you have done that a long time that
Who no your niece
this is lliorno from philadelphia how are you
why
Are you a little cold
Philadelphia that is a is a city or a state what
What
You see
Beautiful Do you have animals cats dogs something like that
Okay eh how old are you
Live concerts or similar
Do you have to talk to them now or not
are you talking to them Are you talking to the kids
fro where are you calling
Thats young Listen and this then why do you live , in , the United States have you lived there all your life or
And now you are married with a Latin guy or an american
but but what do you think about the fact she will not have school colleagues and such
yes its difficult to explain you are not how do they say
what
Because anyways if one says to not turn around you shouldnt see that then like . to an adolescent or to a child it will begin , to sink in and but why doesnt my mom let me
society parents families they have a lot of the work in , helping children to understand those things right My kid when she
if he does that if he has sex with a girl , there , can , be , lots of consequences that that he can hav that can happen you know
uh I dont know if you have had the opportunity to listen to it before
I wanted to say that they use it to say a lot of crazy things right
And you try to say that to someone `` Look , this is , how , it is , this , and , this didnt , you , realize `` Then they say no to you because you were
in a susprisingly big way the people can not take , it anymore but they dont protest , and . I say My G d but What happens with the people so
Right right and fi and here what you do
Twelve
Ah From where The city eh capital
yes
thats good better why why involve yourself in problems
I thing that must be the worst experience i think of , your , life , yes , and , i hope , i hope i never have it because we dont know ¿right
whats up fabiola how are you mm
No no why you know people there
and twelve imagine and and for real we have had , well ? two critical moments at the point of separation and there , came , a time that maturity set in it plays an important role No
No They just respect each other and
Sure Sure Your husband is Chilean as well
Thats good and where originally
Really
And how long have you lived here
And have you been in this thing long Of calling by telephone
hello
in Idaho Falls
OK
En I go to a bigger city then
There in a bigger city but
Of course
Ah
Here there is not art like there are machines
Yes all ready
There is Mexican art and because its more of a rural area
Mhm
They hire Mexican artists to do work in
Ah
Clearly yes yes
Besides latinos it is said that there are Mexicans
Clearly the wheat
So you have to walk saying no no no
No
I am not Mexican
Clearly or what I like is that they believe that I am , Palestinian , or an aquatic thing yes If I go into some restaurants
Yes
Yes like food from the Middle East they tell me
Eh
and they try to speak to me in Arabic I dont know They , think , I . look more like an Indian or something hes but of course is there discrimination or not
oh but
I mean yes like in this area
ah of course
English well and then they have to go no but , the same people you know like everywhere they are kind of
yes Yes Of course
Ah but things like heavy yes
yes still
Oh mm
and that weird things but is is well well far what is the city meaning
Eh
Oh I married a gringo
ah right Idaho
yes I got married to a gringo I got here that way and you
well my mom married a gringo
yes then that is why we came went to Seattle in ninety one I was elen years then
Mn
but my dad stayed in Chile and because that I go and fly like this
Sure
And to
okay
interesting
One like that I am like we live together
yes because I am within the city it is more city maybe . I am from city or from the field for example . I lived in San Rafael do not know if you place yourself but
Oh
yes
hmm I dont know what bothers me is
Ah
then
Oh okay
yes
Its not like
but
coming here is a super drastic change for me
yes I can imagine
because as I was used to living in the city and here . but anyways theres a city here where I could find what I need but life is
is calmer If I may put it that way
Sure
calmer and everything its good though because for example theres not as much crime as in a bigger city
Sure
but its kind of boring
yes I can imagine
kind of
The contact is difficult too
Here Yes but not so much Not so much Even if its small its not so big
listen do not we talked the other day with
yes nice to met you
yes
mhm I am cover trough my husband
uh uhm
and children are also covered so we are o k
Oh yes we are we are not
mhm we are healthy but you never know
community people
yes
And so the papers they asked for with the my . home and proof of work And they finally found a pretext to to not not give it to me because they asked me
hmm
Ah
uh no No no They didnt want to describe me ? True Then in the cases with him he got ill once yes He got worse
the cost of the cost of everything depends on the , demand , And so if those costs go up and up and up
yes yes
well nurses are really well paid because there are not so many you know
Then Well here you can see a 30 year old woman with a really nice car
Mmm
And she is a nurse when you find out that she is a nurse well
Yes like 30 dollars per hour
yes thats similar of what they get paid I understand that in Canada they have many medical
Then any resident in Canada has the right to medical , services , Just , for , been , there and it really doesnt have greater consecuences upon the economy
yes like in Argentina my parents have all the medical expenses paid
Uh uh
all the medical expenses paid they pay a little no but very little
yes yes yes That is the other thing that one could do to try to pay something
yes
is going to have some kind of insurance but even that is
is is very expensive
in all the world In all the world
There is more competition about prescription drugs there
Eh and then last year we went to Argentina went to the , chemist , and , showed it and something which costed here more than fifty dollars
I bought there for twelve
yes yes yes
Twelve dollars same brand and all
The same yes
And in Mexicos case for example the medication of my son comes in 5 or 6 brands
with similar ingredients
No yes yes And here you dont have more than ? one And second that literature is not the best And , if , you , hear only about laboratories I thought that all the North American laboratories for
I truly do I really do
That is that according to it if so
But
yes
Because dont they get you in contact with an organization thats called the Shriners
Uh uh yes
Shriners yes
Eh because they help children
Mm
Now I dont know if they specialize on a specific illness Or if the cover everything because maybe
you can communicate with them and tell them hey we , have , this boy and this is his condition and this is our situation
And maybe they can help in some way Because the , Shriners , help , and pay for medical care of children Who can not pay
parents can not pay
Ah See that I knew him and I thought it was ? for me And I was smaller without being tired and like that only
Mm I am going to crash
maybe they maybe they have more what do I know something that can help you in a
yes yes it is simple because really well on the , one , hand , the , maintenance , is , a medication that , this person who helped me with the sample says no man that
Here they treat us well no problem As soon as you see a community center or such and
Mm
there are a lot of options But knowing a little , more , about . progress of medicine we believe a deeper diagnostic could improve the life of our son with
with epilepsy
Right
because it was under control but the last two years it have come apart It has been out of control
how bad
Yes you know you have to keep trying
And you should be living in a state of anxiety
yes sometimes its like this
and this is a lot of stress
Always
a lot of stress
you have to look up all the time
mmm yes yes yes
When you know it you are always expecting it dont finally happen ? But this is a traumatic for my soon he is an adolescent
It happens to him in school and then he feels very bad
Seventeen
system of uhm
The doctors The medical centers where there are medical schools
Hmm yes
reasonable Something that you can well could uhm do sometimes they dont charge you anything
MM
what month and that thats interesting i had to get a test done i have ADD
uh uh
And i was sure years ago i had it then , i , just got diagnosed , i went to the hospital the one in the university of north Carolina
uh uh
And they did not charge me anything and they did all the tests
yes
Oh but what a thing
the topic is about technical equipment like the technology the , one , you , most , use and depend on and yes how do you consider that dependency
its the same as as i was thinking exactly that they should include it no
yes because is you know a machine
yes the most evident is the computer then but not the only one
ah
yes and thats why the same thing applies when you . buy a car and you always use it and you , have , to maintain it you always do is part of your life
yes yes exactly besides I am here in Texas
ah
I feel that the car culture here is like a culture reminicent of the horses also
yes
in our lives they take care of them here is , as , important as the come on as the horses at that time
yes
For some years ago and well so if they not , say , so , in , our , time , of , comunication , most important devices are those that have to do with communication computer
eh as permitted the information management and all that thing no
yes because in Texas there yes but only there
but
you need the car you know to work
yes
so
exactly and here the working people have like as in . those days a mule no they need one a pick up truck pick
uh
of the most important
yes but the questions about the topic where which ones
well for me it would be more my computer and my cell phone
aha exactly
aha
aha
in before I did not have a cell phone until , I was about , twenty , years old but now that to that live , in Philadelphia in , the , city and that I am not always at the house fo
Im not always returning to the house for you know see my messages
yes yes
well I am always always I always have my cell phone
you have your cell phone
I think that it is very is like surprising that almost everybody has a cell phone here in the United States
yes
yes
the computer was the most important
but now
but now with the kind of work that Im doing . the car is the most important The computer because the car is . what lets you re th the kind of work that Im doing is more
but well it is good for the kind of work
much more space
yes yes
that in the in the city having a car can be an inconvenience too
Yeah yes it is
because you always have to try to park and you , have to pay a lot , to , park , and the gas station isnt close and I dont know its
Its better to have a car a I think
Yeah uh yeah no well here because the distances that you have to cover for work the car is fundamental
Aha of course
But yeah in in the city I think that yeah the , most , impor , and , depending , on , the , work too well uh it could be the computer right Then
Aha
And that uh and the other question is if you , consider , that those technologies turn into more of a problem than than in
aha
no here in Texas we dontt especially where i am have that problem with the parking lots of open spaces didnt come up
we say those problems over here but anyway dont know , what , do , you , think , more , than . anything i would say related to cars there isnt any overall big issue with them at least
we could consider an issue the interest created around car . industry and how they usually seem to affect the development of the technology of
yes
ah and if we look 75 years in the past there wasnt even a bus but today almost all people have it
yes yes but yes
and the same thing with pcs they have machines that would not see the market at least for 10 years because
for
the are very advanced and they will
yes
charge their costs do you get me i dont think i explain very good
100 km with only 1 liter of gasoline
aha
yes
that no a lot of them say that theyre not . affordable that in reality its only a matter of image that , companies , manage , and when its time to see the tables of of performance
of the hybrid cars well I thought they would be much more , efficient I think that what they have accomplished on efficiency is minimal
yes
yes that was an important change
ah
one to according to the tables an economical car drives you it can be thirty six miles per gallon
uh huh
and a hybrid can drive you fifty
ah no ah yes sure sure that there are cars there now like the the Ford
uh well
uh huh
but but the expedition and those enormous cars and that they , spend , you , know can , only , go , like , twenty , miles , eighteen , miles per gallon something like that that is an enormous expense
by small cars new ones that arent in the North , American , market , that are , in , the , European , or Latin American market where they have to be much more efficient
ah yes
n it turns out to be much more expensive to have a , car at what is the initial cost , and for what is going to be saved in gasoline ends
and why is it that
European
yes its yes
over there in other countries they all have small cars that well different different culture you know but
yes I as a matter of fact years ago that was , the problem , with , oil in the eighties or something like that I dont remember
ah uh huh
I thought that there was going to be a change , in , the , culture , because , they , started to to develop smaller cars here in the United States
yes but
I am Ana Maria
Oh Faviola Hi
Hi Faviola
Very good with some sun or with some coldness
Some sun and some coldness ah
Cold
Yes
Me too I have gotten this topic before
No i havent gotten this topic and I had to , talk , about , eh specifically the person when I got talked to me about violence
mhm
that they did not like the idea of going to see a movie . I told them a world that is a world has violence
mhm
They have always had and I have the experience to teach the kids with , pure , peace , and , love , in , the television , or , or of the , world and then when they confront the world realize that its the school
They find that the kids hit him that they didnt , know , how . to defend above all things when you have kids of your own
aja
then uhm I find that I was right in the classification , they , have . I think its the responsibility of the adults until when the kids can see television
I am in agreement that the respons the maximum responsibility is of the parents
Theyre doing their job those on the movies and
Theyre gaining their cash whats their job
its their business you
doing their business yeah
yeah now if you want it take it if you , want to , see it or not is not their responsibility anymore they se
of yeah
that sells
yeah
and thats what they do its not their fault the buyer is at fault
yes because in the end he likes the product thats why
yes
with you its final responsibility whether its violence sex whatever , there is , to protect a a child , the , final responsibility , its for the parents even with a qualification system in place
because if theres for example a movie qualified as PG 13
yes
and you have a minor of that age and you let him see the movie its your responsibility
yes
exactly
entonces why me the the the association or or or whatever that puts the uh that puts the qualifications already has it then
i think yeah look we think more or less the , same on that Faviola . because in the end the responsibility of nurtering and taking . care and what you want him to see and what not
your children or your family and your mother or your husband as a mother
mmm I also believed that I am totally agree and , that normally have access to children when parents are televicion outside

accurate
exact
children are alone
mmm
and there is not enseñarlle or the pope to tell you this should not see this if you see
or go to a sleepover you do not know either
not clear because you have no idea
if you go to a sleepover and they put a movie watch a movie or no control in that house or whatever
not know
exactly
I think the important thing is to give children one . respect these indicates whether a given good principles at home one as a family or teaches things
shure
actually I do not like or do not like it you , see it or not prepared or just going to get far
that because as they say you can not have in a glass box
not and also
leaves exposed or exposed
if not moreover that when children reach an age my son was , fifteen , sixteen , seventeen years and ? I said do not worry because you did the best I could do
mmm
ah you descend from twenty five genes and the rest is education and decision my decision in my life
Look with that
Sure I learned then oh wait no eh oh I was
mm
My cellphone was ringing Okay okay let me answer
okay
eh dont hang up because we have to speak for twelve minutes
yes
Im just going to go turn it off
okay ah
So about the people I think the movies that I love to watch are the horror movies
I see
But sometimes the ones that are scary to me Im an adult
You get scared you get scared
they are scary but Im going to find out the horror movies
I see but you are responsible for watching them you scare yourself
yes
I see well I dont like them so I dont watch them . I dont watch any of them Thats my decision I could , since , I have the , age , to watch them but if its too violent I dont watch them
yes thats why thats why I respect the fact that my son said ones that its a fifty percent responsibility
Yes
of each person the person and then you did the , best , you ? could but then kids grow up and before they are eighteen years old the
some are more mature than the norm
yes
And begin to see the R movies
mmh
at fourteen or fifteen and the PG thirteen are been seen by eleven or twelve years old kids
yeah yes
and sometimes even the littlest ones Sometimes the littlest ones , because . I remember of a friend of Jenny that watched them she sees Harry Potter and is
yes thirteen yes
PG thriteen PG fourteen and then I say Jenny doesn´t like it she gets scared
Yeah
She gets scared by the monsters and all that stuff
yes
But I agree that most of it is the criteria that , you , give , to , them , and , at , the , end take care of , them , if , you don´t want them to watch television when they are alone
yes because because
Don´t let them alone with the TV
But think that you can not control them
But it is just television
You should have a formed criteria to go and see a movie
yes that is why I say it doesn´t have a purpose , to say you ? can not see that not Because there will be a time when they go to a friend´s house
uh huh in the same school it shows movies to them
Oh the same school but the same school is a little , more , supervised because that is another thing Because it goes it goes with a purpose
They show him documentaries
But what I fear more is when he goes to friends , house , And , they , have sometimes , the television , right , there , in , the room that they use it so much or the computer or whatever
And they have access to information without the parents no , nor , the parents , have any . idea And they are in the room the parents think that they are listening to music or whatever
faces that situation he has to learn to value and , to , learn to respond to that That is . what I say or rather trying trying to give them the values of the house
me of course because you know that they are still not prepared
uh huh
eh you read the rules that there are in this telephone game
yes Okay
yes yes yes now I am preparing now I am buying , the gifts for the family . But now I am with all with other things in mind
the coming birthday no
yes but I am preparing buying presents for the family , at least my nephews . I have those ready now we have bought the presents then the big people remain no more
cook and sew Sew that which you did that which you gave to me
Oh because you are
Because I have no time before then
yes so thats what Im going to do also Thats why Im going to make some gifts but for example Andreita whos birthday is soon
yes is the twenty fifth or twenty four I dont remember
Three days then from the twenty four So I have her , gift , I bought her the same thing I bought Miranda So eh
For the one of those screens that you draw and then you erase
But in the meantime the pencil and screen yes
how exciting
And do you know who else has a birthday
OK who
The same date
that I remember when I was there
My father in law that
Your father in law yes
he he Juan Luis Sandras youngest son
Oh yes OK
Also the twenty the twenty ninth Also I remember that about , the same date I remember that they were all on the same date
No you went to Carlistos birthday And the girls
No you went once you went to Chile and left the gift which was for the birthday
Eh it was in April well when I went to Chile it was in April
and I left there the yes I left the present there
yes for a nephew of hers that came after
No but Sandra will not have birthday she will not have a party this year
And to have a more special present
Of course to have a preset more
Juan Juan is the oldest or the youngest
The youngest of all
Poor him
Carolina
Tamara
yes and you
Im in the state of Washington in Seattle
wow Im in Los Angeles
Ah yes
yes its amazing just
yes
Right now I was making a call and suddenly I I mean I didnt think that today , Sunday . I was half more asleep than awake and I Oh my God
yes this is I think my 23th call
wow youre almost ready Im right in the middle this is my 10th
yes and this is the second time I do this service for them
Oh okay okay yes because casually I got a mail that they , will , accept , people wholl do again the eh participate because at first you could participate only once
yes
yes I
More like yeah tell me
little conventional
OK
we started at the theater for example in the case of , theater , no , the , same , one , as , in , tv , Now , we . watch documentary type movies hum with different kind of messages then
No no no and really suddenly we started to receive . information about other kinds of movies and well we switched completely to that furthermore right now we are in one
in one of those kicks that we are even kind of , intellectual now but it is that it is , because , actually it kind of got to that point where you feel that
a very different content that it is worth watching them , but , in , the , end , I have felt that they are making movies like just for making them
aha exactly
I am from Panama
Ah OK I am from Venezuela
Oh OK
Right yes
in then it is true is true
We say in that way to the `` Macha '' no ? like well yes do movies like you want but yes , released some , good released and others if they dont be released dont be released but
Honestly not And the same is happening with the TV , right , now We . had cable and now just a matter of a month , ago , we canceled it because not no I dont know suddenly as
when we went out you knew that he was an American
exactly
and the next day same happened and I said `` oh , ex , agent , I believe they were showing stuff that happened last week and overreacting
Exactly
Because its not true and that
You see coincidentally they showed a picture called The It was something like `` Defending Panama ''
I think it was called `` Los de Richos '' the Chinese sector that practically the whole town disappeared and I
oh from `` Churillo ''
ah Del Chorrillo exactly
Yes thats where it was the part of the police force was there
Yes But just like you say it seems that happens . the same way in Venezuela with the current President There are things happening that you know arent actually happening
from Univision Telling them not to be so shameless asking , them . to not report things that arent true people first say hey that President
thats right
and well I dont know if youve heard him
No no cause like i was saying I dont really pay attention to the news
Of course look theres an internet page were you can , watch TV from all countries including of course Panama its called
Te ve Cuatro like TV four all
TV
four all
Yes theater
But I specifically watch the government chanel the national chanel , Because , the . other channels belong to the opposition then of course it is a litle bit more of the same
of the whole world a little like to compare you , see , that is what , is , going on , and , even , what , we are , doing , as , well , with , the , radion , we , are listening to community radio that you feel that it i you
you are really saying the truth or at least the other , face of the coin . lets not say that it is the truth One hundred per Cent because sometimes it is not
that is it is not that I dont know but that one can . not say either that all of the ones that say the other it is not but
aha
darn they really do manipulate things too much
you got one I dont know if you saw here a movie that was called Auto fox
No maybe but I do not recall
That is a documentary that they worked at Fox New
hmm
and well practically they would force them to say what was ? not true and then they decided to resign to the . channel and aside from resigning all of them got together and started to do like a protest to a level
well on the level of of ehm locally to tell the world what was . going on over there inside Fox News It is very interesting it was called something like
Hello Fernanda How are you My name is Claudia
Where are you talking Well Where are you talking from
from Washington
Washington DC
ah yes because then I think there are two or not
yes Washington State
ah I see and the other one
yes I´m here in Idaho State I don´t know if you know it
yes yes yes of course yes
yes but that thing about the movies the fact is , than in my , point of view I don´t agree with them because after all
they don´t classify them very well Ah for example sometimes , they , say , is PG and later you see that movie and it really
has many dirty words and porn Sometimes another one PG thirteen is more quiet
and doesn´t have such many things like nudity and dirty words , The , true , is that to me those classifications sometimes are like they don´t
yes the true is that I don´t know to much about movies because
aha
lets say I dont have children or anything like that so I almost never realize
aha
what what classification
yes
yes
now many things are like normal that that I think shouldnt be
yes yes its true because eh and its true because , eh once . well I dont have cable I have the regular channels the ones you watch
aha
to keep on choosing my program that Im going to watch in that ra at that time
mhm
and sometimes the show movies that really uf A ten year . old or a nine year old kid was at home , and , he was , watching , that , he was changing channels at the same time as I was and
he stopped on that channel there things that were very very much for adults
sure and
imagine what kind of cartoons are they going to watch , them . I remember that I was once watching the television you see in Mexico Im from Mexico City
mhm
It was around ten in the evening ten PM So , I turned on the TV I had cable there the cable TV
whats that
she turned the television off and she had to explain it to me . because she was surprised I mean shocked because I was watching a regular cartoon channel
and that could happen to any child watching television
And you cant be with your kid all the time , you , cant jump , and , try , to , see , what . hes watching you have to trust that at least during the day
yes
the shows are not going to include nudity or bad words
eh tr in Cablevision and Multivision that would be the same , as , cable . here so ah over there in Mexico they dont have , as many restrictions For example in regular television with regular channels
they have like more more restrictions Eh not so much , in , the . other cables and for example in in teles for example a regular ch channel for kids
in the District of Mexico mhm
before in Mexico But for example if you are watching , a , cable , channel , you , run , the , risk that the cartoon may be something that sometimes is some
aha
aja
whats more here when its not e even ten or at any other time you run the risk of seeing anything
yes yes its true lo the other well eh I was , with , a neighbor , imagine , I was , with a neighbor it was twelve twelve thirty in the afternoon
Well there was a show there was where there was , a a girl that had adventures of a girl that was that that in a hospital
and suddenly it happened right there in the hospital and , they , were , showing ? how how her mom was giving birth to her little brother
Yeah but you can tell i took and told him at her mother and she , said ah no there is no problem is a channel of
of of cartoons of of that they play programs and , sincerely . i was i was they did not leave much to the imagination it . was really a pose of well it was an operating room where the lady was having a baby
what they want but sinceraly a m do not want , to , explain , to my , kids , too , much for the moment sincerly I watch more what they see
yes imagine when lets say there are babysitters and things like that that have no center and you are not even home to see
yes no
I think
yes is of those really those rating they pass Yn , yn , n y primary for the televison the truth already already n
they do not leave a thing to imagination they show you
yes
Now at whatever whatever time of the day you see , one . of those telenovelas I do not like to watch telenovelas but see
Many mo mon is home and has young children three , four , years five or , more they , are at home and they see they are watching their telenovela
And always est they show scenes were they are the a couple they are there having relations
Mhm
During the day why do they put on so operas from six am until it gets dark
Not me
then the programs are classified so it would be normal to see a pornographic on TV in the middle of day
exactly
And i think that if the parents talked to that TV . station and told them to put away unacceptable programs or , to put privacy on some scenes from those kind of scenes
they dont care mhm
what are they teaching them I dont like those classification . things and the producers dont really care i think its only convenient to them because
Or sometimes it even gets their attention because theres a strong scene so those things actually help the
producers to sell
yeah yeah yeah
Even though Im already tired of them but still like . them I have a Disney movie here but i honestly just dont like movies
sure sure
Yes one does not know how they will change
No no so then already the truth is that this is , truly , reaching , too , far , already you turn the TV on and see a tv spot
about women pads and it appears well until almost they are , going to explain , how , soon they will display a naked movie and are going to
show there how she is placing the pad on
exactly
Because sometimes they even draw it for you I do , not , know , if , you , have , seen such , commercials , that , uf They , do not scare you because you are already grown up ¿right but
if a little boy or girl is watching them and , you , say it the . mom is there and can answer all is right and if it is the friend who is there
and she or he answers he/she can explain him/her the wrong info so
then yes
like I sometimes see and one does not realize how things have changed
Good night my name is Mariza de Philadelphia
Hello Hello my name is Juan are you Marisol
Mariza Mariza
Could be I am in San Antonio Texas
OK well the subject today is the issue with religion right
Well Exactly like the need of religion is something something we all have I suppose
Ahh yes in reality every nowadays in this country Eh , in , the United States . there is also a lot a lot of problems with , religion that is . mixed of with politics and a lot of right wing people that are the ones that want to have control
Otherwise Christianity is the most powerful religion in the world and they , are , the , ones , who , most , who , have more control to have an influence to politics to countries
mhm
What they represented a whole project ideology but plain and simple , they are the most conservative groups in the United States right
yes
In the sermon above all it very much called my attention against the public school
Because yes
ah ah no
And against the theory of that they try to see the theory of evolution no
So thats what I had heard yes
Exactly yes there are many problems yes
No each one can believe whatever they want what happens is that they . try to im impose their belief for everyone and that the bible be that they are the ones that think
Exactly those are fundamentalism no
whites from eh Christians and those are the ones that , people with , power , in , this country the ones that , own companies , everyone is , the , same that they . are many conservative fundamentalist people from the right that want to take out the law
The right to abort the right to for example like . another question was about homosexuality gay marriage the right to believe in the
yes more scientific no no One should not only believe , in what , they . say they say God created man and woman but also give the option for kids to believe
that it was Charles Darwin the theory of evolution And
yes
And is very complicated also the other questions was about , homosexuality , yes , yes , If , we , were all ? the same or believed the same thing these problems wouldnt exist asked
yes
In that sense the differences help to compliment
mm
But at any given moment is like like the tolerance , the phenomenon of , homosexuality , should be something that that we , should , be well , informed , on me personally for example I used to think before that
it could be regarded as a deviation homosexuality but lately Ive read that its also a question of genetics
Like I used to accept people because I didnt think they were better , or worse , for . being homosexuals and every one has a right to I dont know to get married to
Well yes
to be with whoever they want Its the same whether is . a man or a woman I dont care and I think , they , have the , same , rights , because , they , are citizens just the same and they pay their own taxes
Because many people think about the homosexuality like a very , perverted , thing , and , they , dont have the , right , to , get married , not , when is a situations when actually the marriage is an agreement
Of course but the the church disagrees
Maybe that was before the traditional way of thinking in , the . past but now times are changing and each one so is , the same , as , before , homosexuality , has , always existed , since the . human being beginning what happen is that before was a way and right now so
it goes I dont know things are more liberal nowadays . lets say people people are not afraid of say anymore so ? I am homosexual or I am gay or I am whatever
Thats the problem That have the church has a problem but it cant do anything becaus
Of course Yes there is some that is very extreme , about , eh . the family and the marriage the church institute and the God blessing to the marriage and stuff when actually
the church and religion is a form of institution it is the same as the school has
Of course
yes
of the society and the individuals no
Yes well but in that case to accept differences seems to , be something that has to do with a matter of humanity no
yes
I for example had the good fortune of traveling a lot of meeting . people from many races many cultures then I am open to everything
But it is that there are kinds there are people , of , all , kinds , and , and , well , there , must , be radical Christians , there , must ? be all kinds but I believe that yes it does influence the country a lot the religion yes
Eh yes it influences a lot what surprises me the most in this case
yes
In this country that it is so fundamental no
Yes I they are
With the churches there is a good percentage of fundamentalists , even in the discurse of the very president there is fundamentalism
Sure yes yes yes
not there
The message is pretty clear its been five years with , this , government . and when Bill Clinton was in the government well he ? was not that he was pretty open lets say sure he was leftist more open a more open person
dont care whether they are Catholics they just want that they , they , want , to eliminate the , right , to abortion , and , things like that its ridiculous at this stage in the century
But thats how we are now
My family is from Spain so we are Catholics lets , say when , you , are . born you get baptized then theres the First Communion and all that well I got married in the church too
I believe well i have my beliefs but i not , attend to the , church to every Sunday service neither practice i am i believe
but lets say i do it at my own way lets say that the faith i have with me i dont
yes
neither neither i am i mean i am very open , i mean its , contradictory , Im quite believer , im catholic but im not you know im not funda nothing
yes It happens the same to me and when I have some closeness with the , Catholic Church it is , almost temporal because They are so hey where is a sense of integration of community in here
created interest in everyone seems
yes yes yes there is lot of economic interest yes
no then
Thats the problem its at first sight that they are . not interested in the church members they are interested in the money and
yes
And also neither they seem to be quite believers there , had been a lot of , cases of child abuses and things like that of child abuses
That are often heard so one ask himself how this can , be possible That a a priest , do this to a child and There is much controversy regarding this
yes good evening
from los Angeles
oh well Im from new york
oh okay i thought it was somebody else sorry
ha
i am from los angeles
oh okay nice to meet you
nice to meet you
well we got this night the technical devices
Im from peru
oh okay
and you
um i am from colombia
colombian
mhm
Oh but you talk like a Mexican
Because here we speak Mexican Spanish
Aha
Because of that
Ah OK of course
Oh
When I lived in Colombia I caught the Colombian Spanish From Bogota especially
Now it is the turn of Mexican Spanish
Because that is what is spoken here
Aha yes
OK of course aha
yes because tonights subject is technical gadgets
ah ah I have the ~D ~S ~L very rapidly now
yes and It fascinates me because I like the internet fast I dont like to wait websites
so for me its very useful because I look for jobs I do surveys look for women
Mhm
Mhm Ya right
I like to do it fast and before when I was in line in the phone
it was really slow
So I had to wait two or three minutes only for one webpage to appear
and until now well I have a webcam and the webcam is really fast with ~D ~S ~L
yeah of course
its fast
Mm ya of course
Well for me as well of course and I work my jo I am an administrator , and , so , uh , my . job I use it and for me the computer I mean the
yes
Then the truth is that I have adapted very well , and , I have loved it , since I , am using , the , computer , well , um , before when the typewriter was used it was so slow to
for me its essential I think that I wouldnt know ? what I could do if without the computer no So the truth is , that I am very happy with this new technology and hopefully it continues
Mm of course I think that they have e they . have done more a advances on the computer than they have on with medicine
Its true
The computer is the most advanced of the civilization now
yes
wants they find it there and well when one sits at the . well I or use it for my work but well also and when I am at home and I need
yes exactly
For everything because if you need to know how the temperature is outside well you go to the computer
News sports
Oh going out with women everything
No and even in this poll that were conducting i found it on the computer too
Yes almost mm then the computer has a lot of influence
in our lives Twenty two thats crap uh twenty two calls
I almost i have to do about three but o one call that the . person spoke more in english so i i think Im gon na have to replace it
Right right
Because i spoke in spanish so they should count it
Because if you speak in English no they dont count it
yes you do a a call to replace
I went to talk to him i know the owner of this
and and I will ask him if I have to replace it
yes
Oh thats good
yes is easy is easy talking to him
No he must be in Philadelphia
Oh okay
but but he gave me the tele
No no no no
Oh only through the computer
yes I know him through the computer but he
through the internet okay aha
but he he talks to the people that are participating
yes then if you have any questions you can hes Chinese
Oh yes
yes well I dont know if he is the owner he is
Oh
the the manager
yes
yes that by supervisor of the project they are pursuing
I see I see I see
No I dont know it but most probably yes because I I al I have one two already
One in English and the other one in Spanish
yes and this what we are doing now is technology
Oh Oh
and this is techonology yes something like that it was it was the same thing but in English
And they paid the same
Oh I see I see
Yes I like doing this not only for the pay but it gives me opportunity
Mm yeah
Oh uh huh
Yes
You couldnt do this twenty thirty years ago what were doing now
Exactly aha
because theyre using multiple phone lines to connect many people who live in different part of the country
I believe that phone technology has made advances also because , I , can make long . distance calls and they dont cost me anything because you pay
uh a monthly fee
Aha
Oh but here in
And that was not like th that was not like that like in five or ten twenty years
Here in the United States yes
yes
if they charged you something monthly but if you make a lot of calls it is worth it
Ay how great
Yes right
Now it is really cheap of course
And why is it cheap Because of technology
Yes that of course
yes the technology
Now you can speak three four five hours for five dollars
It used to be a minute back then oh my god it was like eight
A minute cost around twenty cents yes
Mm
yes yes yes I have been through that too
yes aha
yes yes yes I know what thats like yes that you are going against the clock
Because its advancing and technology is now reaching more people
Mhm Mhm
so services are cheaper they are selling it to more people
Na sure yes
Mhm sure
Eh for example the computer five years ago they were around two two or three thousand dollars
Exactly yes
and now you can buy a computer for two or three hundred dollars
Ah yes thats true aha
because theres there is a lot of demand
Technology is advancing it is advancing
I would love to see
yes
Mm
Thats right
Mm Mm
Ive not seen many improvements in in cure for illnesses in the past ten twenty thirty forty years
OK
Its true because he already has cancer for some years
They havent And this shortens the lives of many people
Yes yes yes
Or or heart disease too
Uh huh AIDS now that its spread through so many places
AIDS is more advanced than cancer in in
Yes thats right
In the sense of being controlled because they already have drugs to fight it
Uh huh yeah
No no no no its true
I see
Very slow
yes
yes yes
that occurs in anyone
I I had a friend that died young at 31 years old and had cancer from one day to the next
yes Already
and he died in three days
yes but that day hisbrain was bleeding
oh my god
and he died immediately she had leuke leukemia of the blood
Oh wow
and from this he had one day for another
Oh my God
mhm and there was nothing they could od
Mm
not that not it
Hello ,  good night .  Who's this ? 
How are you ?  ,  eh ,  I am Guillermo ,  How are you ? 
How are you ,  where you from ? 
yes ,  yes ,  and you ? 
Ah ,  what do you study ? 
Of what university ? 
Pardon ? 
me ,  Sorry what did you say ? 
Do you live in Peru ? 
Oh Oh ,  okay .  So you are not an exchange student ,  you are a transfer ? 
Ah that's good .  And you think so far ? 
i ,  i  ,  i would like to take less subjects ,  i don't know ,  how many subjects do you take ? 
or do you study full time ? 
Ah ,  I would do that sometimes but ,  where are you ,  in which part of the library ?  In
You ,  where do you work ? 
Where is that ? 
Ah ,  in England ,  for example ? 
Each one ,  each system has its cons and pros .  But ,  and in Peru ?  ,  how is it ,  in general ? 
Here ,  they keep you constantly writing ,  papers ,  and reviews ,  right ? 
And there are personal items or in groups ? 
what ? 
Its really cold here right ? 
Its warm right ? 
but in peru ,  they told me there are regions were its very very cold ,  right ? 
Hello ,  Gloria .   I am Paulina .   Where do you call from ? 
Ah ? 
Mm .   How is  ? 
Yes ,  like this one ,  What should I have said ?  ,  Me ,  at  night ,  me to the girls where I work ,  three
what religion is she ,  your friend ? 
Hmm Where are you from ? 
Puerto Rican .  But you grew up in the United States ? 
Oh ,  where there's work .  ¿And what do you work in there ? 
Oh my god ,  yes ,  yes .  That's a lot of work ,  ¿right ?  ,  i do ,  i do children parties .  I dress like a clown and now I'm trying to imagine how can i make Elmo's head
¿Oh ,  right ? 
Ah ,  yes ? 
Really ?  Ah ,  yes .  I think she is from Georgia . 
good evening ,  you're talking to fabiola ,  who am i speaking too ? 
oh ,  how are you ? 
good ,  thanks ,  and you ? 
are you enquiring about music ,  what kind of music do you like listening too ? 
why ?  i also like music ,  that right ,  positive music ,  not negative music . 
do you like dancing ? 
Oh ,  me too .  Now I dance when I'm cleaning the house .  Are you married ? 
Ah ,  And children ? 
Do you have a favorite singer ? 
Oh ,  where you from ? 
And where are you from ? 
Very god .  Are you a little cold ? 
Where did you say you called ? 
Where are you calling from ? 
This city is to the um ,  Are you in Washington ,  D . C .  or Washington state ? 
In um listen ,  do you like Ricky Martin ? 
Ricky Martin ? 
what have you heard ? 
You now if is so good  ? 
What style of music do they play ? 
Have you heard it ? 
Who ? 
How long ?  How long have you been in the United States ? 
Five years and do you already speak English and everything ? 
Did you get your citizenship or not yet ? 
Oh ,  Oh ,  do you speak Italian ? 
Ah ,  they are ,  right ?  Are you happy with residency .  Your parents are . 
You see ? 
Okay .  And your grandparents ?  Your aunts and uncles ?  Are they in Italy ? 
Are animals not allowed ? 
Yes ,  and do you have any pet ? 
Ah ,  I see .  Is your husband from here ,  the United States ,  or ?  Or from Venezuela ? 
and do you have any idea of eh ?  of what kind of puppy you want ? 
which ones are those ? 
Good evening .  How are you ? 
Yes ,  how are you ? 
Good ,  well .  My name is Carlos .  I am from Houston Texas .  And you ? 
How is it going ? 
Very well very well .  What do you think of today's theme ? 
Okay .  Pardon ? 
and you ? 
Excuse me ? 
What ? 
ok .  eh ,  what is your favorite kind of music ? 
is there some kind of music which you don't like ? 
ok .  And do you have a favorite band ? 
What ,  uh ,  do you buy music or do you have a lot of CDs ? 
The ,  and the uh you say that you play instruments ,  uh is it ,  does your husband play in a band ,  a musical group ? 
well I ,  eh ,  I have an Ipod .  Do you know what an iPod is ? 
yes ? 
What ,  what do you study ? 
And what is the best thing that has happened to you in life ? 
why ?  It's OK all of that about nice subjects that well you can find interesting things to talk about when you talk on here because they also play music for you yesterday the music was
Yes they are ,  and what are you doing to make them laugh ? 
Kids are entertaining ,  and oh my how they're growing .  And are you talking to them ? 
What ? 
in English ? 
and where did she learn to speak ?  did she learn to speak when she was in Chile ?  well ,  yes
But isn't that bad ? 
and do you have plans for Christmas or Thanksgiving ? 
for Christmas are you already planning the gifts and all that ? 
what ? 
the gifts ,  are you planning for Christmas or not ? 
and you ? 
¿and do you have plans for Christmas ? 
¿Really ? 
¿And what kind of car is it ? 
¿Huh ? 
and what did you get her for her birthday ? 
a karaoke machine ,  and she plays with that ? 
eh ? 
the mouse has a calculator ? 
eh ? 
and will you be here for Christmas or will you go to ? 
It's the same as what I think .  I say how we going to go even with the new house we bought .  How ?  they tell me
Yeah ? 
Yeah ? 
And they are ?  Are they those in the living room ? 
Ahh ,  you didn't put perciana ? 
Who is speaking ? 
from where ? 
yes ,  where are you from ? 
and you ? 
Are you studying here in the United States ? 
do you study or work ? 
yes ,  it's true ,  and until which year you think give him home schooling ? 
But ,  you think ,  you're planning give him all primary ,  right ? 
So ,  you have teach all they way up to high school ,  or what ? 
Well ,  And which subjects the most ? 
I imagine that you have studied something like education ,  or something like that ,  no ? 
what did you study ? 
mhm your husband you met him where ? 
Where do you live ? 
yes but of course she's going to do it .  What did you study ? 
Well ,  my name is Claudia Ivette ,  who am I talking too ? 
nice to meet you too ,  where are you ? 
Where from ,  excuse me ? 
ah ,  where are you ? 
this place is called Robert ,  where are you calling from ? 
that's that's what draws my attention a little ,  I don't know if the same happens to you ,  do you go alone or with someone else ? 
What's your name ? 
Joe ? 
yes ,  and what's your name ? 
Alex ,  where are you from ? 
Where are you from again ? 
Well ,  what do you think of tonight's topic ? 
are obvious ,  right ?  ,  But I think that the R rating is not very well defined about they can or can't have .  I agree that
many movies ,  right ?  ,  don't make any sense ,  for example ,  there are many gangster movies ,  so ,  many of the real gangster go and watch it because they
Do you have teenagers ? 
Oh ,  I said ,  good heavens ,  how is it going to be ?  Hey ,  today we had a hard topic
Where are you from ? 
they change the facts of what's happening and so I always come across people that say ,  for example ,  they tell me ,  what do you think about that crazy President of yours ?  and
Exactly ,  that's what they say to me sometimes .  "What are you doing here ? "
because What are you doing here ?  And well ,  same as you ,  thank goodness .  You are here ,  no in Venezuela . 
but I tell you ,  I don't know ,  suddenly here You are in Pennsylvania ,  you told me ? 
me too ,  at the beginning I had no access to that and that website was like ,  my God ,  is it true what they are saying there in Venezuela ?  But I would talk to my friends and
and they would say ,  no girl ,  what's that ?  Look ,  I ,  that's a lie ,  but you see ,  the power of television is
Sure ,  sure ,  what are you doing there in Philadelphia ? 
Oh ,  and you like it there more than Miami  ? 
And ,  what you're going to do  ?  works is first ,  first place
But ,  from how you've been around here in United States  ? 
So ,  I would also look at American people and would treat them badly but now ,  I have understood that they are not to blame ,  and that they are people from the United States ,  they are not Americans ,  that's a badly understood term ,  isn't it ?  So , 
why ?  Why
Well ,  my name is Ibet ,  with whom do I have the pleasure ? 
Hi Mercedes ,  how are you ?  Where are you from Mercedes ? 
Oh ,  from Honduras ? 
Ah ,  from where ? 
And you where are you from ? 
And what do you think about today's subject ?  What if it's more eh it's easier to break up with someone young or ,  or if the age makes a difference . 
And some time did you have a difficult break up ? 
eh ,  I am going to have three children and I was already building castles on air when one time he cane and said ,  you know what ?  Not I ,  here it ends . 
How ? 
what about you ? 
yeah and how did it happen to you ? 
are you married ? 
Eh What else ?  let's see what else , after that I had no other formal boyfriend until S more then , for real the experiences that I never had any mane experience like I do not even know , right ?  thank God . 
It's impossible to maintain a ,  ¿right ?  ,  a situation like that ,  like
If you always love the person ,  well it's impossible for it to be only peace ,  that's what I'm saying ,  ¿right ? 
because one ,  because I ,  I'm one ,  It's human and one has to ,  things that very upset other people ,  right ?  and
yes ,  the truth me bein  i think it has to be something for real ,  eh very hard eh ,  keeping it everything happy ,  right ?  but
that ,  of course ,  you aren't meeting him profusely ,  right ?  until you're already married with that person but it's but i think that i think that
the drama is __  ,  it is ,  ehm ,  a lot ,  right ?  and and then people don't know how to leave that cycle of ,  of abuse ,  right ?  that is what happens
And I told her ,  And now you with glasses ?  Was cloudy the day ,  really And she had a hit that her boyfriend did to her . 
your boyfriend and she said ,  well it is ,  it is too difficult to end the relationship with him ,  and I told her ,  why ?  she says
And then ,  wow ,  I gave  What ?  How can be possible that you love to some person that hits you ,  that beats you ?  sometimes she came eh ,  bruised ,  or sometimes eh
fine  ,  and you ? 
well ,  well .  Where are you ? 
in washington ?  yes
and you ? 
we are just extremes ,  good .  and where you from ? 
from where ? 
Oh ,  I see ,  I see .  Well ,  you know ,  they have a strong accent .  Right ?  Like ,  you and I .  Mm . 
you and I ,  are you Arepa ? 
Mhm ,  oh .  Do you work at the Hilton ? 
Do you work ? 
Okay ,  okay .  Chilean ,  of course ,  no ? 
Yes yes yes ,  now I am ,  it is in the oral part .  No ?  I am like in the other extreme of the ,  of the
What do they speak ? 
But they will have that option ,  so .  Some parents even mix the sign language with the oral part ,  right ?  It depends on the
And what do you think about today's subject ,  about the ? 
ah ,  sometimes ,  it's quite hard ,  right ?  I think that love is the only thing that help us get over the difficulties ,  just that . 
well ,  they will overcome them ,  do you agree ? 
ah ,  I say like that ,  that if I fall ,  I get up again .   What is the problem ? 
No ?  I mean ,  exactly .   Then ,  fortunately ,  well ,  eh ,  the first time was rather horrible ,  because I thought it was the end of the world .   And ,  well ,  there we were ,  and we lasted a good time that we were not dealing with each other until one day I said ,  well ,  but ,  what is happening ? 
Mm ,  horr  ,  horrible ,  horrible .   I told him ,  loo ,  you know what ?  yes ,  it seems to me . 
because we're going to do with a mediocre relationship ?  I do not want a mediocre relationship . as you say ,  people who spend up to thirty years together ,  that's a pigs relationship . 
Yes ? 
that they are treated badly .  no piece of that thing ,  what is that ?  that I want ? 
No ?   And ,  there are others that say ,  love .   If there is not love ,  there isn't anything . 
You think is easier ? 
And what ,  what was it you told me ? 
what are you saying ?  Oh when we were super
Hello ,  hello ,  how are you ? 
Oh ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  and you ? 
really ?  me too . 
and what's it called ,  and of course then I went and came back but more or less the ninety one ,  yes .  And you ? 
And and you ,  where are you from ? 
From Santiago too ? 
oh yes ? 
ok ,  are you calling everyday ? 
Ah ,  because union shouldn't of because one does not want to do it ? 
That .  Yes ,  and you like it here ? 
yes ,  well .   And like but ,  there do people use cars a lot or is there public transportation ? 
And how do get to Idaho ? 
oh really ? 
And then are you single now ? 
okay Ah , see and what is this called do you like it or not ? 
Hello ,  how are you ?  my name is Juan .  Marcela
yes ,  how are you ? 
I have not forget you ,  we talked nicely ,  right ? 
Do you have Medical insurance here ?  are you cover ? 
that is a problem right ? 
to give information about the person who was hiring me and at that time well the person refused to give information ,  right ? 
So they didn't give you ,  erm ,  care ? 
Isn't it ?  Yes ,  he gave it to me .  So yes ,  it is something we think that well there should be some kind of bit more flexible ,  right ,  so that by itself there is for the community but it is a specific type of community
Because there is more demand and people pay .  And then costs go up because people ask more more money .  And working people ask for more money ,  it is a vicious circle .  An so how could it suddenly ,  could they create social medication ? 
Exactly .  That's a problem ,  it's a circle that works with profit , it's stronger ,  right ? 
Because ,  well ,  i don't know how it works where you live ,  but here ,  people with money are nurses and doctors ,  right ? 
is expensive ,  right ?  And I don't know how the prescription drugs are here ,  In Mexico are cheaper and also
Strong interest in everything ,  no  ? 
according to what expertise you have to operate here .  Do you know what you should do  ? 
yes I knew that .   Listen ,  did the time run out already or what ? 
Of course because on top of that it embarrasses him .   Let's see ,  how old is he ? 
yes ,  yes ,  it is a stigma .   It is a stigma .   What he has ,  no ?  then
How old is he ? 
yes Do you also know where to find out ?   In the hospitals where they teach
see people that not ,  that can not pay in the situation like a normal ,  see ?   Like us that can not go to a specialist doctor because it costs a lot of money
Oh ,  really ? 
with the University .  oh ? 
Mm .  Uh ,  uh .  So then ,  if they told me no ,  well you have to bring us information .  I had a letter showing my income and so on ,  right ? 
No ?  well not me .  But ,  well then ,  now I have my social security ,  myself . 
Hy ,  how are you  ?  my name is Juan
yes ,  what ,  you where what  ? 
listen ,  here is all good ,  what do you think about today's topic  ? 
no ,  i didn't listen ,  what is the topic  ? 
and how do you consider the issues of the technology ,  no  ?  you daily life ,  if it turn more of a problem than a solution ,  something like that
that includes the automobiles ,  the cars  ? 
exactly ,  how's then ,  but ,  i told then that yes ,  the car look as the most important ,  no  ?  and i think after that at best a computer too ,  but no
aha ,  exactly but sometimes ,  eh ,  it looks more like a personal element depending on the case ,  could be the cars ,  no  ?  because the computer already is a tool more
than the ,  sometimes ,  we say that belongs to the institution where you are ,  no  ?  more like a job tool
but a more personal tool looks like is a car ,  no  ? 
why you have to take care of the car ?  ,  you know ? 
you used more horses ? 
no ?  is like a horse ,  is something like ,  very ,  very ,  very personal ,  a close thing
ah ?  yes ,  yes
pick up truck ,  no ? 
and the computers ,  well ,  since practically there is there is television ,  telephone and computers in all homes ,  no ?  but but like there are other dimensions no ?  about the technological question ,  then the car seems to be
oh ,  what  what technical question ,  technological is more important in your life ?   that is what we are discussing right now if it would have to be the car or if it would have to be the computer ,  what do you think ? 
because you know ?  because I have my cell phone and I am always with it
and ,  well I have gotten used to having a cell phone ,  you know ? 
 ,  yes look that yes ,  that is very important what you have just said ,  a long time ago when I worked I had a kind of work in which the computer was the most important ,  no ? 
and well ,  the messages were on the computer ,  I was always on the internet ,  the emails more than the phone ,  neither cell phone nor anything no ? 
more physical ,  right ?  Then the car becomes the ins  the more important device and the computer ,  well ,  is a second level ,  even though it's also very important ,  right ? 
good for I think ,  how good ,  you and ,  you were in Texas and obviously you know ,  there there's more ,  uh ,  how do you say it ?  I understand you have more like farms and everything there ,  you know ? 
It's more of a problem than a tor  than ,  than a help ,  but obviously ,  you know ? 
Oh ,  yeah ? 
the ,  the other question or ,  or the communication devices ,  right ?  Like you said ,  the cell phone and
alright ,  what kind of problems he could have  ?  like you just said ,  the only problems with the car could come from parking
transportation ,  no  ?  ,  for example
aha ,  but ,  don't you think is a bit magnificent the change happened in like sixty years  ? 
exactly yes ,  like they say too ,  with the auto industry right  ?  if they advanced technologically like the electronic one the best car would transport us with
right  ?  and instead of costing you ,  say ,  20 . 000 dollars ,  would cost you 2000
if that were the case ,  no ?  but ,  as technology ,  in this case the industry ,  has its interests then no ,  like it doesn't move forward ,  no ?  you see what they're saying now with the hybrids
no ?  no ,  it doesn't seem to me that they have a real a real ,  this that it's really a very important change like technological given the efficiency that
what ? 
you don't think it is an important change ,  or ? 
no ,  I don't think that it is so important every time that the efficiency they demonstrate isn't radically different to the one the other cars have is very little ,  no ?  you see ,  I say
the pickup well not the pick up trucks because they're changing them so that they're more efficient ,  you know ? 
yes exactly and and of course ,  and but ,  at the same time for example with these autos of um ,  there are some small cars that give you almost the same performance as the hybrids ,  and they're not hybrids ,  no ? 
and smaller ,  no ?  so if we compare the costs of a hybrid against a small European car ,  or or from Iso which circulate in latinamerica well then
being less to what an auto has ,  a good economic car ,  no ? 
why is it that the United States is one of the only nations that has this ,  that ,  you have these enormous autos only here ,  you know ? 
I though well ,  there will be a change in the culture ,  but that was only for the moment ,  no ?  ,  it seems because it has some enormous cars ,  they continue like
How are you ? 
Good and you ,  How is the weather over there in your house ? 
Over here it's ugly ,  we are too cold .  What do you think of the movies ?  Have you already talked about this topic ? 
it's because you let him and you thought it could be ,  isn't it ? 
that´s what I say ,  you can control them ,  you cannot see this movie because of this or that .  Because you lack of maturity or whatever we want to tell them ,  isn´t that true ? 
um I was asking myself ,  ah ,  how is this ?  are you preparing for Christmas now ? 
What did you buy Miranda ? 
who ? 
yes it is true ,  who ? 
Tamara ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  fine .  Where are you ? 
yes ,  yes ,  they got me off base .  But you've already been doing this for some time ? 
no ,  you got that same mail  , right ?  I mean ,  apparently this will keep going .  That's what I got from the mail they sent
Then ,  what do you think about what they show in the movies the ? 
Tell me ?  Well i am going to tell you honestly ,  it has been more than a year since we stopped watching movies movies in regular movie theaters and we started at the theater
watch movies that are in hum how is this called ?  the movie festivals ,  here as an example recently ended the International Latin American Movie Festival
tupid ,  so dumb that I was bothered to be in the movie theatre ,  I well ,  and what are we doing here ?   What waste of time is this ? 
What are you doing no ?   I mean to see that ,  honestly I rather go to sleep or I'd rather do something else instead of of ,  I don't tell you all movies ,  there are some that have a
aha ,  like well we have to make ten movies .  we are going to make ten movies but it doesn't matter ,  how ?  or when ?  however it comes out ,  without
care ase we say .   Where are you from ? 
but then they show it again and show it again and show it again .  Oh my God .  What is this ?  we are paying for this then it is like a discomfort ,  right now we have a discomfort with
And were we there and My husband you know ?  that white guy ,  white paper compare with my dad is black and my mom is white then I am more black than my dad ,  so
Hey ,  weren't we there this morning ?  I don't remember seeing anything about it there
Pardon ? 
How are you ? 
ah ,  Which one of them two ? 
And ,  where are you ? 
And I think hat eh Americans have ,  no  like that the mo  moral standards have gone down ,  you get me ?  so
but for example ,  I once had for ,  for a while cable and sometimes it was ,  well ,  why do they like it ?  ten in the morning ,  eleven ,  and well y don't like to keep changing channels
because ,  they c  can show ,  let's say at ten in the evening and the programs they show are never so ,  you don't don't run the risk ,  no ?  that they would be so bad like here .  Here
ah yes ? 
well you see , no ?  in that aspect , but uf . 
As the things are going ,  even the Disney ones may have pornography in a while ,  ¿right ?  then
and one gets accustomed ¿do you understand ?  so to speak
really ? 
No ,  terrible ,  they said ,  Why this harassment of teachers that teach the bible to explain the creation of the world ? 
aha ,  do you ,  do you  follow any particular religion ? 
oh ,  how are you carolina ?  do you talk to Alex
what alex ? 
where are you from ? 
a lo  ,  lots of things ,  and ,  and I don't like to wait for ,  the websites ,  you understand me ? 
And you ? 
the most essential ,  and above all uh ,  and in the new techniques ,  no ?  the new technology that has arrived and each day newer things come out ,  no ? 
type documents and reports ,  and all ,  now everything is done by the computer and the internet ,  no ?  I mean that is it something marvelous
advancing more each day ,  no ? 
Uh huh ,  yes ,  and for everything ,  no ?  I mean that it's everything that one
some information ,  well I sit at the computer and there is no one to stop me ,  I don't know ,  that when someone is already like something ,  an essential part of one's life ,  no ? 
Right ,  of course ,  ¿and how many calls have you made already ? 
Bu  ,  but ¿who knows ? 
But and ,  the payment is made after you finish the twenty five calls ,  ¿right ? 
Oh ,  ¿yeah ? 
Oh ,  ah ,  You know the owner ? 
Oh ,  he's from ,  Is he from California ? 
Ah ,  but you know him personally ? 
Oh ,  okay ,  oh ,  yes ?  Oh ,  no ,  I never talk to him ,  I . 
Oh ,  this is your second one ,  oh is it ? 
I see ,  I see Oh ,  and was the other one the same ,  twenty five phone calls ? 
I see ,  and they paid you ,  as well ,  the same ? 
And what other technology do you use ?   What we're doing now is technology . 
And you know what ?  One day they will make it international too to your favorite country . 
How great ,  right ?  Like so ,  it would be excellent to make country calls ,  there when one wants I think it will come ,  because with that thing about the cards too ,  right ?  every day
it was expensive before .  did you remember before ?  to call the country of
And it is cheaper right ? 
and so I had to be keeping track of the clock ,  no ? 
yes ,  I've had ,  to be honest ,  I hope that technology keeps on advancing because I think that in ten  years ,  what else are they coming up with ,  right ? 
You know ,  this has to keep on advancing ,  right ? 
do you understand ? 
You have to look for cure to illnesses like cancer ,  eh ,  yes ,  you can go to the moon so ,  why can't they find a cure for cancer ?  Yes ,  it can be done ,  if they can do a
super fast computer ,  one can think ,  why aren't they looking for a cure for cancer ? 
Yes ,  how many people ,  right ?  Kills
And they haven't found a cure ,  have they ?  They haven't found it ,  have they ? 
Have you heard of a discovery of a cure for cancer ? 
I think not .  I think that that something will arrive that that God shows ,  for that will arrive something that can cure this cancer catastrophe ,  the age is not important but it will be ,  but it will arrive ,  right ? 
Oh my god .  In three days ?  Oh
Hello ,  good night .  Who's this ? 
How are you ?  ,  eh ,  I am Guillermo ,  How are you ? 
How are you ,  where you from ? 
yes ,  yes ,  and you ? 
Ah ,  what do you study ? 
Of what university ? 
Pardon ? 
me ,  Sorry what did you say ? 
Do you live in Peru ? 
Oh Oh ,  okay .  So you are not an exchange student ,  you are a transfer ? 
Ah that's good .  And you think so far ? 
i ,  i  ,  i would like to take less subjects ,  i don't know ,  how many subjects do you take ? 
or do you study full time ? 
Ah ,  I would do that sometimes but ,  where are you ,  in which part of the library ?  In
You ,  where do you work ? 
Where is that ? 
Ah ,  in England ,  for example ? 
Each one ,  each system has its cons and pros .  But ,  and in Peru ?  ,  how is it ,  in general ? 
Here ,  they keep you constantly writing ,  papers ,  and reviews ,  right ? 
And there are personal items or in groups ? 
what ? 
Its really cold here right ? 
Its warm right ? 
but in peru ,  they told me there are regions were its very very cold ,  right ? 
Hello ,  Gloria .   I am Paulina .   Where do you call from ? 
Ah ? 
Mm .   How is  ? 
Yes ,  like this one ,  What should I have said ?  ,  Me ,  at  night ,  me to the girls where I work ,  three
what religion is she ,  your friend ? 
Hmm Where are you from ? 
Puerto Rican .  But you grew up in the United States ? 
Oh ,  where there's work .  ¿And what do you work in there ? 
Oh my god ,  yes ,  yes .  That's a lot of work ,  ¿right ?  ,  i do ,  i do children parties .  I dress like a clown and now I'm trying to imagine how can i make Elmo's head
¿Oh ,  right ? 
Ah ,  yes ? 
Really ?  Ah ,  yes .  I think she is from Georgia . 
good evening ,  you're talking to fabiola ,  who am i speaking too ? 
oh ,  how are you ? 
good ,  thanks ,  and you ? 
are you enquiring about music ,  what kind of music do you like listening too ? 
why ?  i also like music ,  that right ,  positive music ,  not negative music . 
do you like dancing ? 
Oh ,  me too .  Now I dance when I'm cleaning the house .  Are you married ? 
Ah ,  And children ? 
Do you have a favorite singer ? 
Oh ,  where you from ? 
And where are you from ? 
Very god .  Are you a little cold ? 
Where did you say you called ? 
Where are you calling from ? 
This city is to the um ,  Are you in Washington ,  D . C .  or Washington state ? 
In um listen ,  do you like Ricky Martin ? 
Ricky Martin ? 
what have you heard ? 
You now if is so good  ? 
What style of music do they play ? 
Have you heard it ? 
Who ? 
How long ?  How long have you been in the United States ? 
Five years and do you already speak English and everything ? 
Did you get your citizenship or not yet ? 
Oh ,  Oh ,  do you speak Italian ? 
Ah ,  they are ,  right ?  Are you happy with residency .  Your parents are . 
You see ? 
Okay .  And your grandparents ?  Your aunts and uncles ?  Are they in Italy ? 
Are animals not allowed ? 
Yes ,  and do you have any pet ? 
Ah ,  I see .  Is your husband from here ,  the United States ,  or ?  Or from Venezuela ? 
and do you have any idea of eh ?  of what kind of puppy you want ? 
which ones are those ? 
Good evening .  How are you ? 
Yes ,  how are you ? 
Good ,  well .  My name is Carlos .  I am from Houston Texas .  And you ? 
How is it going ? 
Very well very well .  What do you think of today's theme ? 
Okay .  Pardon ? 
and you ? 
Excuse me ? 
What ? 
ok .  eh ,  what is your favorite kind of music ? 
is there some kind of music which you don't like ? 
ok .  And do you have a favorite band ? 
What ,  uh ,  do you buy music or do you have a lot of CDs ? 
The ,  and the uh you say that you play instruments ,  uh is it ,  does your husband play in a band ,  a musical group ? 
well I ,  eh ,  I have an Ipod .  Do you know what an iPod is ? 
yes ? 
What ,  what do you study ? 
And what is the best thing that has happened to you in life ? 
why ?  It's OK all of that about nice subjects that well you can find interesting things to talk about when you talk on here because they also play music for you yesterday the music was
Yes they are ,  and what are you doing to make them laugh ? 
Kids are entertaining ,  and oh my how they're growing .  And are you talking to them ? 
What ? 
in English ? 
and where did she learn to speak ?  did she learn to speak when she was in Chile ?  well ,  yes
But isn't that bad ? 
and do you have plans for Christmas or Thanksgiving ? 
for Christmas are you already planning the gifts and all that ? 
what ? 
the gifts ,  are you planning for Christmas or not ? 
and you ? 
¿and do you have plans for Christmas ? 
¿Really ? 
¿And what kind of car is it ? 
¿Huh ? 
and what did you get her for her birthday ? 
a karaoke machine ,  and she plays with that ? 
eh ? 
the mouse has a calculator ? 
eh ? 
and will you be here for Christmas or will you go to ? 
It's the same as what I think .  I say how we going to go even with the new house we bought .  How ?  they tell me
Yeah ? 
Yeah ? 
And they are ?  Are they those in the living room ? 
Ahh ,  you didn't put perciana ? 
Who is speaking ? 
from where ? 
yes ,  where are you from ? 
and you ? 
Are you studying here in the United States ? 
do you study or work ? 
yes ,  it's true ,  and until which year you think give him home schooling ? 
But ,  you think ,  you're planning give him all primary ,  right ? 
So ,  you have teach all they way up to high school ,  or what ? 
Well ,  And which subjects the most ? 
I imagine that you have studied something like education ,  or something like that ,  no ? 
what did you study ? 
mhm your husband you met him where ? 
Where do you live ? 
yes but of course she's going to do it .  What did you study ? 
Well ,  my name is Claudia Ivette ,  who am I talking too ? 
nice to meet you too ,  where are you ? 
Where from ,  excuse me ? 
ah ,  where are you ? 
this place is called Robert ,  where are you calling from ? 
that's that's what draws my attention a little ,  I don't know if the same happens to you ,  do you go alone or with someone else ? 
What's your name ? 
Joe ? 
yes ,  and what's your name ? 
Alex ,  where are you from ? 
Where are you from again ? 
Well ,  what do you think of tonight's topic ? 
are obvious ,  right ?  ,  But I think that the R rating is not very well defined about they can or can't have .  I agree that
many movies ,  right ?  ,  don't make any sense ,  for example ,  there are many gangster movies ,  so ,  many of the real gangster go and watch it because they
Do you have teenagers ? 
Oh ,  I said ,  good heavens ,  how is it going to be ?  Hey ,  today we had a hard topic
Where are you from ? 
they change the facts of what's happening and so I always come across people that say ,  for example ,  they tell me ,  what do you think about that crazy President of yours ?  and
Exactly ,  that's what they say to me sometimes .  "What are you doing here ? "
because What are you doing here ?  And well ,  same as you ,  thank goodness .  You are here ,  no in Venezuela . 
but I tell you ,  I don't know ,  suddenly here You are in Pennsylvania ,  you told me ? 
me too ,  at the beginning I had no access to that and that website was like ,  my God ,  is it true what they are saying there in Venezuela ?  But I would talk to my friends and
and they would say ,  no girl ,  what's that ?  Look ,  I ,  that's a lie ,  but you see ,  the power of television is
Sure ,  sure ,  what are you doing there in Philadelphia ? 
Oh ,  and you like it there more than Miami  ? 
And ,  what you're going to do  ?  works is first ,  first place
But ,  from how you've been around here in United States  ? 
So ,  I would also look at American people and would treat them badly but now ,  I have understood that they are not to blame ,  and that they are people from the United States ,  they are not Americans ,  that's a badly understood term ,  isn't it ?  So , 
why ?  Why
Well ,  my name is Ibet ,  with whom do I have the pleasure ? 
Hi Mercedes ,  how are you ?  Where are you from Mercedes ? 
Oh ,  from Honduras ? 
Ah ,  from where ? 
And you where are you from ? 
And what do you think about today's subject ?  What if it's more eh it's easier to break up with someone young or ,  or if the age makes a difference . 
And some time did you have a difficult break up ? 
eh ,  I am going to have three children and I was already building castles on air when one time he cane and said ,  you know what ?  Not I ,  here it ends . 
How ? 
what about you ? 
yeah and how did it happen to you ? 
are you married ? 
Eh What else ?  let's see what else , after that I had no other formal boyfriend until S more then , for real the experiences that I never had any mane experience like I do not even know , right ?  thank God . 
It's impossible to maintain a ,  ¿right ?  ,  a situation like that ,  like
If you always love the person ,  well it's impossible for it to be only peace ,  that's what I'm saying ,  ¿right ? 
because one ,  because I ,  I'm one ,  It's human and one has to ,  things that very upset other people ,  right ?  and
yes ,  the truth me bein  i think it has to be something for real ,  eh very hard eh ,  keeping it everything happy ,  right ?  but
that ,  of course ,  you aren't meeting him profusely ,  right ?  until you're already married with that person but it's but i think that i think that
the drama is __  ,  it is ,  ehm ,  a lot ,  right ?  and and then people don't know how to leave that cycle of ,  of abuse ,  right ?  that is what happens
And I told her ,  And now you with glasses ?  Was cloudy the day ,  really And she had a hit that her boyfriend did to her . 
your boyfriend and she said ,  well it is ,  it is too difficult to end the relationship with him ,  and I told her ,  why ?  she says
And then ,  wow ,  I gave  What ?  How can be possible that you love to some person that hits you ,  that beats you ?  sometimes she came eh ,  bruised ,  or sometimes eh
fine  ,  and you ? 
well ,  well .  Where are you ? 
in washington ?  yes
and you ? 
we are just extremes ,  good .  and where you from ? 
from where ? 
Oh ,  I see ,  I see .  Well ,  you know ,  they have a strong accent .  Right ?  Like ,  you and I .  Mm . 
you and I ,  are you Arepa ? 
Mhm ,  oh .  Do you work at the Hilton ? 
Do you work ? 
Okay ,  okay .  Chilean ,  of course ,  no ? 
Yes yes yes ,  now I am ,  it is in the oral part .  No ?  I am like in the other extreme of the ,  of the
What do they speak ? 
But they will have that option ,  so .  Some parents even mix the sign language with the oral part ,  right ?  It depends on the
And what do you think about today's subject ,  about the ? 
ah ,  sometimes ,  it's quite hard ,  right ?  I think that love is the only thing that help us get over the difficulties ,  just that . 
well ,  they will overcome them ,  do you agree ? 
ah ,  I say like that ,  that if I fall ,  I get up again .   What is the problem ? 
No ?  I mean ,  exactly .   Then ,  fortunately ,  well ,  eh ,  the first time was rather horrible ,  because I thought it was the end of the world .   And ,  well ,  there we were ,  and we lasted a good time that we were not dealing with each other until one day I said ,  well ,  but ,  what is happening ? 
Mm ,  horr  ,  horrible ,  horrible .   I told him ,  loo ,  you know what ?  yes ,  it seems to me . 
because we're going to do with a mediocre relationship ?  I do not want a mediocre relationship . as you say ,  people who spend up to thirty years together ,  that's a pigs relationship . 
Yes ? 
that they are treated badly .  no piece of that thing ,  what is that ?  that I want ? 
No ?   And ,  there are others that say ,  love .   If there is not love ,  there isn't anything . 
You think is easier ? 
And what ,  what was it you told me ? 
what are you saying ?  Oh when we were super
Hello ,  hello ,  how are you ? 
Oh ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  and you ? 
really ?  me too . 
and what's it called ,  and of course then I went and came back but more or less the ninety one ,  yes .  And you ? 
And and you ,  where are you from ? 
From Santiago too ? 
oh yes ? 
ok ,  are you calling everyday ? 
Ah ,  because union shouldn't of because one does not want to do it ? 
That .  Yes ,  and you like it here ? 
yes ,  well .   And like but ,  there do people use cars a lot or is there public transportation ? 
And how do get to Idaho ? 
oh really ? 
And then are you single now ? 
okay Ah , see and what is this called do you like it or not ? 
Hello ,  how are you ?  my name is Juan .  Marcela
yes ,  how are you ? 
I have not forget you ,  we talked nicely ,  right ? 
Do you have Medical insurance here ?  are you cover ? 
that is a problem right ? 
to give information about the person who was hiring me and at that time well the person refused to give information ,  right ? 
So they didn't give you ,  erm ,  care ? 
Isn't it ?  Yes ,  he gave it to me .  So yes ,  it is something we think that well there should be some kind of bit more flexible ,  right ,  so that by itself there is for the community but it is a specific type of community
Because there is more demand and people pay .  And then costs go up because people ask more more money .  And working people ask for more money ,  it is a vicious circle .  An so how could it suddenly ,  could they create social medication ? 
Exactly .  That's a problem ,  it's a circle that works with profit , it's stronger ,  right ? 
Because ,  well ,  i don't know how it works where you live ,  but here ,  people with money are nurses and doctors ,  right ? 
is expensive ,  right ?  And I don't know how the prescription drugs are here ,  In Mexico are cheaper and also
Strong interest in everything ,  no  ? 
according to what expertise you have to operate here .  Do you know what you should do  ? 
yes I knew that .   Listen ,  did the time run out already or what ? 
Of course because on top of that it embarrasses him .   Let's see ,  how old is he ? 
yes ,  yes ,  it is a stigma .   It is a stigma .   What he has ,  no ?  then
How old is he ? 
yes Do you also know where to find out ?   In the hospitals where they teach
see people that not ,  that can not pay in the situation like a normal ,  see ?   Like us that can not go to a specialist doctor because it costs a lot of money
Oh ,  really ? 
with the University .  oh ? 
Mm .  Uh ,  uh .  So then ,  if they told me no ,  well you have to bring us information .  I had a letter showing my income and so on ,  right ? 
No ?  well not me .  But ,  well then ,  now I have my social security ,  myself . 
Hy ,  how are you  ?  my name is Juan
yes ,  what ,  you where what  ? 
listen ,  here is all good ,  what do you think about today's topic  ? 
no ,  i didn't listen ,  what is the topic  ? 
and how do you consider the issues of the technology ,  no  ?  you daily life ,  if it turn more of a problem than a solution ,  something like that
that includes the automobiles ,  the cars  ? 
exactly ,  how's then ,  but ,  i told then that yes ,  the car look as the most important ,  no  ?  and i think after that at best a computer too ,  but no
aha ,  exactly but sometimes ,  eh ,  it looks more like a personal element depending on the case ,  could be the cars ,  no  ?  because the computer already is a tool more
than the ,  sometimes ,  we say that belongs to the institution where you are ,  no  ?  more like a job tool
but a more personal tool looks like is a car ,  no  ? 
why you have to take care of the car ?  ,  you know ? 
you used more horses ? 
no ?  is like a horse ,  is something like ,  very ,  very ,  very personal ,  a close thing
ah ?  yes ,  yes
pick up truck ,  no ? 
and the computers ,  well ,  since practically there is there is television ,  telephone and computers in all homes ,  no ?  but but like there are other dimensions no ?  about the technological question ,  then the car seems to be
oh ,  what  what technical question ,  technological is more important in your life ?   that is what we are discussing right now if it would have to be the car or if it would have to be the computer ,  what do you think ? 
because you know ?  because I have my cell phone and I am always with it
and ,  well I have gotten used to having a cell phone ,  you know ? 
 ,  yes look that yes ,  that is very important what you have just said ,  a long time ago when I worked I had a kind of work in which the computer was the most important ,  no ? 
and well ,  the messages were on the computer ,  I was always on the internet ,  the emails more than the phone ,  neither cell phone nor anything no ? 
more physical ,  right ?  Then the car becomes the ins  the more important device and the computer ,  well ,  is a second level ,  even though it's also very important ,  right ? 
good for I think ,  how good ,  you and ,  you were in Texas and obviously you know ,  there there's more ,  uh ,  how do you say it ?  I understand you have more like farms and everything there ,  you know ? 
It's more of a problem than a tor  than ,  than a help ,  but obviously ,  you know ? 
Oh ,  yeah ? 
the ,  the other question or ,  or the communication devices ,  right ?  Like you said ,  the cell phone and
alright ,  what kind of problems he could have  ?  like you just said ,  the only problems with the car could come from parking
transportation ,  no  ?  ,  for example
aha ,  but ,  don't you think is a bit magnificent the change happened in like sixty years  ? 
exactly yes ,  like they say too ,  with the auto industry right  ?  if they advanced technologically like the electronic one the best car would transport us with
right  ?  and instead of costing you ,  say ,  20 . 000 dollars ,  would cost you 2000
if that were the case ,  no ?  but ,  as technology ,  in this case the industry ,  has its interests then no ,  like it doesn't move forward ,  no ?  you see what they're saying now with the hybrids
no ?  no ,  it doesn't seem to me that they have a real a real ,  this that it's really a very important change like technological given the efficiency that
what ? 
you don't think it is an important change ,  or ? 
no ,  I don't think that it is so important every time that the efficiency they demonstrate isn't radically different to the one the other cars have is very little ,  no ?  you see ,  I say
the pickup well not the pick up trucks because they're changing them so that they're more efficient ,  you know ? 
yes exactly and and of course ,  and but ,  at the same time for example with these autos of um ,  there are some small cars that give you almost the same performance as the hybrids ,  and they're not hybrids ,  no ? 
and smaller ,  no ?  so if we compare the costs of a hybrid against a small European car ,  or or from Iso which circulate in latinamerica well then
being less to what an auto has ,  a good economic car ,  no ? 
why is it that the United States is one of the only nations that has this ,  that ,  you have these enormous autos only here ,  you know ? 
I though well ,  there will be a change in the culture ,  but that was only for the moment ,  no ?  ,  it seems because it has some enormous cars ,  they continue like
How are you ? 
Good and you ,  How is the weather over there in your house ? 
Over here it's ugly ,  we are too cold .  What do you think of the movies ?  Have you already talked about this topic ? 
it's because you let him and you thought it could be ,  isn't it ? 
that´s what I say ,  you can control them ,  you cannot see this movie because of this or that .  Because you lack of maturity or whatever we want to tell them ,  isn´t that true ? 
um I was asking myself ,  ah ,  how is this ?  are you preparing for Christmas now ? 
What did you buy Miranda ? 
who ? 
yes it is true ,  who ? 
Tamara ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  fine .  Where are you ? 
yes ,  yes ,  they got me off base .  But you've already been doing this for some time ? 
no ,  you got that same mail  , right ?  I mean ,  apparently this will keep going .  That's what I got from the mail they sent
Then ,  what do you think about what they show in the movies the ? 
Tell me ?  Well i am going to tell you honestly ,  it has been more than a year since we stopped watching movies movies in regular movie theaters and we started at the theater
watch movies that are in hum how is this called ?  the movie festivals ,  here as an example recently ended the International Latin American Movie Festival
tupid ,  so dumb that I was bothered to be in the movie theatre ,  I well ,  and what are we doing here ?   What waste of time is this ? 
What are you doing no ?   I mean to see that ,  honestly I rather go to sleep or I'd rather do something else instead of of ,  I don't tell you all movies ,  there are some that have a
aha ,  like well we have to make ten movies .  we are going to make ten movies but it doesn't matter ,  how ?  or when ?  however it comes out ,  without
care ase we say .   Where are you from ? 
but then they show it again and show it again and show it again .  Oh my God .  What is this ?  we are paying for this then it is like a discomfort ,  right now we have a discomfort with
And were we there and My husband you know ?  that white guy ,  white paper compare with my dad is black and my mom is white then I am more black than my dad ,  so
Hey ,  weren't we there this morning ?  I don't remember seeing anything about it there
Pardon ? 
How are you ? 
ah ,  Which one of them two ? 
And ,  where are you ? 
And I think hat eh Americans have ,  no  like that the mo  moral standards have gone down ,  you get me ?  so
but for example ,  I once had for ,  for a while cable and sometimes it was ,  well ,  why do they like it ?  ten in the morning ,  eleven ,  and well y don't like to keep changing channels
because ,  they c  can show ,  let's say at ten in the evening and the programs they show are never so ,  you don't don't run the risk ,  no ?  that they would be so bad like here .  Here
ah yes ? 
well you see , no ?  in that aspect , but uf . 
As the things are going ,  even the Disney ones may have pornography in a while ,  ¿right ?  then
and one gets accustomed ¿do you understand ?  so to speak
really ? 
No ,  terrible ,  they said ,  Why this harassment of teachers that teach the bible to explain the creation of the world ? 
aha ,  do you ,  do you  follow any particular religion ? 
oh ,  how are you carolina ?  do you talk to Alex
what alex ? 
where are you from ? 
a lo  ,  lots of things ,  and ,  and I don't like to wait for ,  the websites ,  you understand me ? 
And you ? 
the most essential ,  and above all uh ,  and in the new techniques ,  no ?  the new technology that has arrived and each day newer things come out ,  no ? 
type documents and reports ,  and all ,  now everything is done by the computer and the internet ,  no ?  I mean that is it something marvelous
advancing more each day ,  no ? 
Uh huh ,  yes ,  and for everything ,  no ?  I mean that it's everything that one
some information ,  well I sit at the computer and there is no one to stop me ,  I don't know ,  that when someone is already like something ,  an essential part of one's life ,  no ? 
Right ,  of course ,  ¿and how many calls have you made already ? 
Bu  ,  but ¿who knows ? 
But and ,  the payment is made after you finish the twenty five calls ,  ¿right ? 
Oh ,  ¿yeah ? 
Oh ,  ah ,  You know the owner ? 
Oh ,  he's from ,  Is he from California ? 
Ah ,  but you know him personally ? 
Oh ,  okay ,  oh ,  yes ?  Oh ,  no ,  I never talk to him ,  I . 
Oh ,  this is your second one ,  oh is it ? 
I see ,  I see Oh ,  and was the other one the same ,  twenty five phone calls ? 
I see ,  and they paid you ,  as well ,  the same ? 
And what other technology do you use ?   What we're doing now is technology . 
And you know what ?  One day they will make it international too to your favorite country . 
How great ,  right ?  Like so ,  it would be excellent to make country calls ,  there when one wants I think it will come ,  because with that thing about the cards too ,  right ?  every day
it was expensive before .  did you remember before ?  to call the country of
And it is cheaper right ? 
and so I had to be keeping track of the clock ,  no ? 
yes ,  I've had ,  to be honest ,  I hope that technology keeps on advancing because I think that in ten  years ,  what else are they coming up with ,  right ? 
You know ,  this has to keep on advancing ,  right ? 
do you understand ? 
You have to look for cure to illnesses like cancer ,  eh ,  yes ,  you can go to the moon so ,  why can't they find a cure for cancer ?  Yes ,  it can be done ,  if they can do a
super fast computer ,  one can think ,  why aren't they looking for a cure for cancer ? 
Yes ,  how many people ,  right ?  Kills
And they haven't found a cure ,  have they ?  They haven't found it ,  have they ? 
Have you heard of a discovery of a cure for cancer ? 
I think not .  I think that that something will arrive that that God shows ,  for that will arrive something that can cure this cancer catastrophe ,  the age is not important but it will be ,  but it will arrive ,  right ? 
Oh my god .  In three days ?  Oh
Hello ,  good night .  Who's this ? 
How are you ?  ,  eh ,  I am Guillermo ,  How are you ? 
How are you ,  where you from ? 
yes ,  yes ,  and you ? 
Ah ,  what do you study ? 
Of what university ? 
Pardon ? 
me ,  Sorry what did you say ? 
Do you live in Peru ? 
Oh Oh ,  okay .  So you are not an exchange student ,  you are a transfer ? 
Ah that's good .  And you think so far ? 
i ,  i  ,  i would like to take less subjects ,  i don't know ,  how many subjects do you take ? 
or do you study full time ? 
Ah ,  I would do that sometimes but ,  where are you ,  in which part of the library ?  In
You ,  where do you work ? 
Where is that ? 
Ah ,  in England ,  for example ? 
Each one ,  each system has its cons and pros .  But ,  and in Peru ?  ,  how is it ,  in general ? 
Here ,  they keep you constantly writing ,  papers ,  and reviews ,  right ? 
And there are personal items or in groups ? 
what ? 
Its really cold here right ? 
Its warm right ? 
but in peru ,  they told me there are regions were its very very cold ,  right ? 
Hello ,  Gloria .   I am Paulina .   Where do you call from ? 
Ah ? 
Mm .   How is  ? 
Yes ,  like this one ,  What should I have said ?  ,  Me ,  at  night ,  me to the girls where I work ,  three
what religion is she ,  your friend ? 
Hmm Where are you from ? 
Puerto Rican .  But you grew up in the United States ? 
Oh ,  where there's work .  ¿And what do you work in there ? 
Oh my god ,  yes ,  yes .  That's a lot of work ,  ¿right ?  ,  i do ,  i do children parties .  I dress like a clown and now I'm trying to imagine how can i make Elmo's head
¿Oh ,  right ? 
Ah ,  yes ? 
Really ?  Ah ,  yes .  I think she is from Georgia . 
good evening ,  you're talking to fabiola ,  who am i speaking too ? 
oh ,  how are you ? 
good ,  thanks ,  and you ? 
are you enquiring about music ,  what kind of music do you like listening too ? 
why ?  i also like music ,  that right ,  positive music ,  not negative music . 
do you like dancing ? 
Oh ,  me too .  Now I dance when I'm cleaning the house .  Are you married ? 
Ah ,  And children ? 
Do you have a favorite singer ? 
Oh ,  where you from ? 
And where are you from ? 
Very god .  Are you a little cold ? 
Where did you say you called ? 
Where are you calling from ? 
This city is to the um ,  Are you in Washington ,  D . C .  or Washington state ? 
In um listen ,  do you like Ricky Martin ? 
Ricky Martin ? 
what have you heard ? 
You now if is so good  ? 
What style of music do they play ? 
Have you heard it ? 
Who ? 
How long ?  How long have you been in the United States ? 
Five years and do you already speak English and everything ? 
Did you get your citizenship or not yet ? 
Oh ,  Oh ,  do you speak Italian ? 
Ah ,  they are ,  right ?  Are you happy with residency .  Your parents are . 
You see ? 
Okay .  And your grandparents ?  Your aunts and uncles ?  Are they in Italy ? 
Are animals not allowed ? 
Yes ,  and do you have any pet ? 
Ah ,  I see .  Is your husband from here ,  the United States ,  or ?  Or from Venezuela ? 
and do you have any idea of eh ?  of what kind of puppy you want ? 
which ones are those ? 
Good evening .  How are you ? 
Yes ,  how are you ? 
Good ,  well .  My name is Carlos .  I am from Houston Texas .  And you ? 
How is it going ? 
Very well very well .  What do you think of today's theme ? 
Okay .  Pardon ? 
and you ? 
Excuse me ? 
What ? 
ok .  eh ,  what is your favorite kind of music ? 
is there some kind of music which you don't like ? 
ok .  And do you have a favorite band ? 
What ,  uh ,  do you buy music or do you have a lot of CDs ? 
The ,  and the uh you say that you play instruments ,  uh is it ,  does your husband play in a band ,  a musical group ? 
well I ,  eh ,  I have an Ipod .  Do you know what an iPod is ? 
yes ? 
What ,  what do you study ? 
And what is the best thing that has happened to you in life ? 
why ?  It's OK all of that about nice subjects that well you can find interesting things to talk about when you talk on here because they also play music for you yesterday the music was
Yes they are ,  and what are you doing to make them laugh ? 
Kids are entertaining ,  and oh my how they're growing .  And are you talking to them ? 
What ? 
in English ? 
and where did she learn to speak ?  did she learn to speak when she was in Chile ?  well ,  yes
But isn't that bad ? 
and do you have plans for Christmas or Thanksgiving ? 
for Christmas are you already planning the gifts and all that ? 
what ? 
the gifts ,  are you planning for Christmas or not ? 
and you ? 
¿and do you have plans for Christmas ? 
¿Really ? 
¿And what kind of car is it ? 
¿Huh ? 
and what did you get her for her birthday ? 
a karaoke machine ,  and she plays with that ? 
eh ? 
the mouse has a calculator ? 
eh ? 
and will you be here for Christmas or will you go to ? 
It's the same as what I think .  I say how we going to go even with the new house we bought .  How ?  they tell me
Yeah ? 
Yeah ? 
And they are ?  Are they those in the living room ? 
Ahh ,  you didn't put perciana ? 
Who is speaking ? 
from where ? 
yes ,  where are you from ? 
and you ? 
Are you studying here in the United States ? 
do you study or work ? 
yes ,  it's true ,  and until which year you think give him home schooling ? 
But ,  you think ,  you're planning give him all primary ,  right ? 
So ,  you have teach all they way up to high school ,  or what ? 
Well ,  And which subjects the most ? 
I imagine that you have studied something like education ,  or something like that ,  no ? 
what did you study ? 
mhm your husband you met him where ? 
Where do you live ? 
yes but of course she's going to do it .  What did you study ? 
Well ,  my name is Claudia Ivette ,  who am I talking too ? 
nice to meet you too ,  where are you ? 
Where from ,  excuse me ? 
ah ,  where are you ? 
this place is called Robert ,  where are you calling from ? 
that's that's what draws my attention a little ,  I don't know if the same happens to you ,  do you go alone or with someone else ? 
What's your name ? 
Joe ? 
yes ,  and what's your name ? 
Alex ,  where are you from ? 
Where are you from again ? 
Well ,  what do you think of tonight's topic ? 
are obvious ,  right ?  ,  But I think that the R rating is not very well defined about they can or can't have .  I agree that
many movies ,  right ?  ,  don't make any sense ,  for example ,  there are many gangster movies ,  so ,  many of the real gangster go and watch it because they
Do you have teenagers ? 
Oh ,  I said ,  good heavens ,  how is it going to be ?  Hey ,  today we had a hard topic
Where are you from ? 
they change the facts of what's happening and so I always come across people that say ,  for example ,  they tell me ,  what do you think about that crazy President of yours ?  and
Exactly ,  that's what they say to me sometimes .  "What are you doing here ? "
because What are you doing here ?  And well ,  same as you ,  thank goodness .  You are here ,  no in Venezuela . 
but I tell you ,  I don't know ,  suddenly here You are in Pennsylvania ,  you told me ? 
me too ,  at the beginning I had no access to that and that website was like ,  my God ,  is it true what they are saying there in Venezuela ?  But I would talk to my friends and
and they would say ,  no girl ,  what's that ?  Look ,  I ,  that's a lie ,  but you see ,  the power of television is
Sure ,  sure ,  what are you doing there in Philadelphia ? 
Oh ,  and you like it there more than Miami  ? 
And ,  what you're going to do  ?  works is first ,  first place
But ,  from how you've been around here in United States  ? 
So ,  I would also look at American people and would treat them badly but now ,  I have understood that they are not to blame ,  and that they are people from the United States ,  they are not Americans ,  that's a badly understood term ,  isn't it ?  So , 
why ?  Why
Well ,  my name is Ibet ,  with whom do I have the pleasure ? 
Hi Mercedes ,  how are you ?  Where are you from Mercedes ? 
Oh ,  from Honduras ? 
Ah ,  from where ? 
And you where are you from ? 
And what do you think about today's subject ?  What if it's more eh it's easier to break up with someone young or ,  or if the age makes a difference . 
And some time did you have a difficult break up ? 
eh ,  I am going to have three children and I was already building castles on air when one time he cane and said ,  you know what ?  Not I ,  here it ends . 
How ? 
what about you ? 
yeah and how did it happen to you ? 
are you married ? 
Eh What else ?  let's see what else , after that I had no other formal boyfriend until S more then , for real the experiences that I never had any mane experience like I do not even know , right ?  thank God . 
It's impossible to maintain a ,  ¿right ?  ,  a situation like that ,  like
If you always love the person ,  well it's impossible for it to be only peace ,  that's what I'm saying ,  ¿right ? 
because one ,  because I ,  I'm one ,  It's human and one has to ,  things that very upset other people ,  right ?  and
yes ,  the truth me bein  i think it has to be something for real ,  eh very hard eh ,  keeping it everything happy ,  right ?  but
that ,  of course ,  you aren't meeting him profusely ,  right ?  until you're already married with that person but it's but i think that i think that
the drama is __  ,  it is ,  ehm ,  a lot ,  right ?  and and then people don't know how to leave that cycle of ,  of abuse ,  right ?  that is what happens
And I told her ,  And now you with glasses ?  Was cloudy the day ,  really And she had a hit that her boyfriend did to her . 
your boyfriend and she said ,  well it is ,  it is too difficult to end the relationship with him ,  and I told her ,  why ?  she says
And then ,  wow ,  I gave  What ?  How can be possible that you love to some person that hits you ,  that beats you ?  sometimes she came eh ,  bruised ,  or sometimes eh
fine  ,  and you ? 
well ,  well .  Where are you ? 
in washington ?  yes
and you ? 
we are just extremes ,  good .  and where you from ? 
from where ? 
Oh ,  I see ,  I see .  Well ,  you know ,  they have a strong accent .  Right ?  Like ,  you and I .  Mm . 
you and I ,  are you Arepa ? 
Mhm ,  oh .  Do you work at the Hilton ? 
Do you work ? 
Okay ,  okay .  Chilean ,  of course ,  no ? 
Yes yes yes ,  now I am ,  it is in the oral part .  No ?  I am like in the other extreme of the ,  of the
What do they speak ? 
But they will have that option ,  so .  Some parents even mix the sign language with the oral part ,  right ?  It depends on the
And what do you think about today's subject ,  about the ? 
ah ,  sometimes ,  it's quite hard ,  right ?  I think that love is the only thing that help us get over the difficulties ,  just that . 
well ,  they will overcome them ,  do you agree ? 
ah ,  I say like that ,  that if I fall ,  I get up again .   What is the problem ? 
No ?  I mean ,  exactly .   Then ,  fortunately ,  well ,  eh ,  the first time was rather horrible ,  because I thought it was the end of the world .   And ,  well ,  there we were ,  and we lasted a good time that we were not dealing with each other until one day I said ,  well ,  but ,  what is happening ? 
Mm ,  horr  ,  horrible ,  horrible .   I told him ,  loo ,  you know what ?  yes ,  it seems to me . 
because we're going to do with a mediocre relationship ?  I do not want a mediocre relationship . as you say ,  people who spend up to thirty years together ,  that's a pigs relationship . 
Yes ? 
that they are treated badly .  no piece of that thing ,  what is that ?  that I want ? 
No ?   And ,  there are others that say ,  love .   If there is not love ,  there isn't anything . 
You think is easier ? 
And what ,  what was it you told me ? 
what are you saying ?  Oh when we were super
Hello ,  hello ,  how are you ? 
Oh ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  and you ? 
really ?  me too . 
and what's it called ,  and of course then I went and came back but more or less the ninety one ,  yes .  And you ? 
And and you ,  where are you from ? 
From Santiago too ? 
oh yes ? 
ok ,  are you calling everyday ? 
Ah ,  because union shouldn't of because one does not want to do it ? 
That .  Yes ,  and you like it here ? 
yes ,  well .   And like but ,  there do people use cars a lot or is there public transportation ? 
And how do get to Idaho ? 
oh really ? 
And then are you single now ? 
okay Ah , see and what is this called do you like it or not ? 
Hello ,  how are you ?  my name is Juan .  Marcela
yes ,  how are you ? 
I have not forget you ,  we talked nicely ,  right ? 
Do you have Medical insurance here ?  are you cover ? 
that is a problem right ? 
to give information about the person who was hiring me and at that time well the person refused to give information ,  right ? 
So they didn't give you ,  erm ,  care ? 
Isn't it ?  Yes ,  he gave it to me .  So yes ,  it is something we think that well there should be some kind of bit more flexible ,  right ,  so that by itself there is for the community but it is a specific type of community
Because there is more demand and people pay .  And then costs go up because people ask more more money .  And working people ask for more money ,  it is a vicious circle .  An so how could it suddenly ,  could they create social medication ? 
Exactly .  That's a problem ,  it's a circle that works with profit , it's stronger ,  right ? 
Because ,  well ,  i don't know how it works where you live ,  but here ,  people with money are nurses and doctors ,  right ? 
is expensive ,  right ?  And I don't know how the prescription drugs are here ,  In Mexico are cheaper and also
Strong interest in everything ,  no  ? 
according to what expertise you have to operate here .  Do you know what you should do  ? 
yes I knew that .   Listen ,  did the time run out already or what ? 
Of course because on top of that it embarrasses him .   Let's see ,  how old is he ? 
yes ,  yes ,  it is a stigma .   It is a stigma .   What he has ,  no ?  then
How old is he ? 
yes Do you also know where to find out ?   In the hospitals where they teach
see people that not ,  that can not pay in the situation like a normal ,  see ?   Like us that can not go to a specialist doctor because it costs a lot of money
Oh ,  really ? 
with the University .  oh ? 
Mm .  Uh ,  uh .  So then ,  if they told me no ,  well you have to bring us information .  I had a letter showing my income and so on ,  right ? 
No ?  well not me .  But ,  well then ,  now I have my social security ,  myself . 
Hy ,  how are you  ?  my name is Juan
yes ,  what ,  you where what  ? 
listen ,  here is all good ,  what do you think about today's topic  ? 
no ,  i didn't listen ,  what is the topic  ? 
and how do you consider the issues of the technology ,  no  ?  you daily life ,  if it turn more of a problem than a solution ,  something like that
that includes the automobiles ,  the cars  ? 
exactly ,  how's then ,  but ,  i told then that yes ,  the car look as the most important ,  no  ?  and i think after that at best a computer too ,  but no
aha ,  exactly but sometimes ,  eh ,  it looks more like a personal element depending on the case ,  could be the cars ,  no  ?  because the computer already is a tool more
than the ,  sometimes ,  we say that belongs to the institution where you are ,  no  ?  more like a job tool
but a more personal tool looks like is a car ,  no  ? 
why you have to take care of the car ?  ,  you know ? 
you used more horses ? 
no ?  is like a horse ,  is something like ,  very ,  very ,  very personal ,  a close thing
ah ?  yes ,  yes
pick up truck ,  no ? 
and the computers ,  well ,  since practically there is there is television ,  telephone and computers in all homes ,  no ?  but but like there are other dimensions no ?  about the technological question ,  then the car seems to be
oh ,  what  what technical question ,  technological is more important in your life ?   that is what we are discussing right now if it would have to be the car or if it would have to be the computer ,  what do you think ? 
because you know ?  because I have my cell phone and I am always with it
and ,  well I have gotten used to having a cell phone ,  you know ? 
 ,  yes look that yes ,  that is very important what you have just said ,  a long time ago when I worked I had a kind of work in which the computer was the most important ,  no ? 
and well ,  the messages were on the computer ,  I was always on the internet ,  the emails more than the phone ,  neither cell phone nor anything no ? 
more physical ,  right ?  Then the car becomes the ins  the more important device and the computer ,  well ,  is a second level ,  even though it's also very important ,  right ? 
good for I think ,  how good ,  you and ,  you were in Texas and obviously you know ,  there there's more ,  uh ,  how do you say it ?  I understand you have more like farms and everything there ,  you know ? 
It's more of a problem than a tor  than ,  than a help ,  but obviously ,  you know ? 
Oh ,  yeah ? 
the ,  the other question or ,  or the communication devices ,  right ?  Like you said ,  the cell phone and
alright ,  what kind of problems he could have  ?  like you just said ,  the only problems with the car could come from parking
transportation ,  no  ?  ,  for example
aha ,  but ,  don't you think is a bit magnificent the change happened in like sixty years  ? 
exactly yes ,  like they say too ,  with the auto industry right  ?  if they advanced technologically like the electronic one the best car would transport us with
right  ?  and instead of costing you ,  say ,  20 . 000 dollars ,  would cost you 2000
if that were the case ,  no ?  but ,  as technology ,  in this case the industry ,  has its interests then no ,  like it doesn't move forward ,  no ?  you see what they're saying now with the hybrids
no ?  no ,  it doesn't seem to me that they have a real a real ,  this that it's really a very important change like technological given the efficiency that
what ? 
you don't think it is an important change ,  or ? 
no ,  I don't think that it is so important every time that the efficiency they demonstrate isn't radically different to the one the other cars have is very little ,  no ?  you see ,  I say
the pickup well not the pick up trucks because they're changing them so that they're more efficient ,  you know ? 
yes exactly and and of course ,  and but ,  at the same time for example with these autos of um ,  there are some small cars that give you almost the same performance as the hybrids ,  and they're not hybrids ,  no ? 
and smaller ,  no ?  so if we compare the costs of a hybrid against a small European car ,  or or from Iso which circulate in latinamerica well then
being less to what an auto has ,  a good economic car ,  no ? 
why is it that the United States is one of the only nations that has this ,  that ,  you have these enormous autos only here ,  you know ? 
I though well ,  there will be a change in the culture ,  but that was only for the moment ,  no ?  ,  it seems because it has some enormous cars ,  they continue like
How are you ? 
Good and you ,  How is the weather over there in your house ? 
Over here it's ugly ,  we are too cold .  What do you think of the movies ?  Have you already talked about this topic ? 
it's because you let him and you thought it could be ,  isn't it ? 
that´s what I say ,  you can control them ,  you cannot see this movie because of this or that .  Because you lack of maturity or whatever we want to tell them ,  isn´t that true ? 
um I was asking myself ,  ah ,  how is this ?  are you preparing for Christmas now ? 
What did you buy Miranda ? 
who ? 
yes it is true ,  who ? 
Tamara ,  how are you ? 
Fine ,  fine .  Where are you ? 
yes ,  yes ,  they got me off base .  But you've already been doing this for some time ? 
no ,  you got that same mail  , right ?  I mean ,  apparently this will keep going .  That's what I got from the mail they sent
Then ,  what do you think about what they show in the movies the ? 
Tell me ?  Well i am going to tell you honestly ,  it has been more than a year since we stopped watching movies movies in regular movie theaters and we started at the theater
watch movies that are in hum how is this called ?  the movie festivals ,  here as an example recently ended the International Latin American Movie Festival
tupid ,  so dumb that I was bothered to be in the movie theatre ,  I well ,  and what are we doing here ?   What waste of time is this ? 
What are you doing no ?   I mean to see that ,  honestly I rather go to sleep or I'd rather do something else instead of of ,  I don't tell you all movies ,  there are some that have a
aha ,  like well we have to make ten movies .  we are going to make ten movies but it doesn't matter ,  how ?  or when ?  however it comes out ,  without
care ase we say .   Where are you from ? 
but then they show it again and show it again and show it again .  Oh my God .  What is this ?  we are paying for this then it is like a discomfort ,  right now we have a discomfort with
And were we there and My husband you know ?  that white guy ,  white paper compare with my dad is black and my mom is white then I am more black than my dad ,  so
Hey ,  weren't we there this morning ?  I don't remember seeing anything about it there
Pardon ? 
How are you ? 
ah ,  Which one of them two ? 
And ,  where are you ? 
And I think hat eh Americans have ,  no  like that the mo  moral standards have gone down ,  you get me ?  so
but for example ,  I once had for ,  for a while cable and sometimes it was ,  well ,  why do they like it ?  ten in the morning ,  eleven ,  and well y don't like to keep changing channels
because ,  they c  can show ,  let's say at ten in the evening and the programs they show are never so ,  you don't don't run the risk ,  no ?  that they would be so bad like here .  Here
ah yes ? 
well you see , no ?  in that aspect , but uf . 
As the things are going ,  even the Disney ones may have pornography in a while ,  ¿right ?  then
and one gets accustomed ¿do you understand ?  so to speak
really ? 
No ,  terrible ,  they said ,  Why this harassment of teachers that teach the bible to explain the creation of the world ? 
aha ,  do you ,  do you  follow any particular religion ? 
oh ,  how are you carolina ?  do you talk to Alex
what alex ? 
where are you from ? 
a lo  ,  lots of things ,  and ,  and I don't like to wait for ,  the websites ,  you understand me ? 
And you ? 
the most essential ,  and above all uh ,  and in the new techniques ,  no ?  the new technology that has arrived and each day newer things come out ,  no ? 
type documents and reports ,  and all ,  now everything is done by the computer and the internet ,  no ?  I mean that is it something marvelous
advancing more each day ,  no ? 
Uh huh ,  yes ,  and for everything ,  no ?  I mean that it's everything that one
some information ,  well I sit at the computer and there is no one to stop me ,  I don't know ,  that when someone is already like something ,  an essential part of one's life ,  no ? 
Right ,  of course ,  ¿and how many calls have you made already ? 
Bu  ,  but ¿who knows ? 
But and ,  the payment is made after you finish the twenty five calls ,  ¿right ? 
Oh ,  ¿yeah ? 
Oh ,  ah ,  You know the owner ? 
Oh ,  he's from ,  Is he from California ? 
Ah ,  but you know him personally ? 
Oh ,  okay ,  oh ,  yes ?  Oh ,  no ,  I never talk to him ,  I . 
Oh ,  this is your second one ,  oh is it ? 
I see ,  I see Oh ,  and was the other one the same ,  twenty five phone calls ? 
I see ,  and they paid you ,  as well ,  the same ? 
And what other technology do you use ?   What we're doing now is technology . 
And you know what ?  One day they will make it international too to your favorite country . 
How great ,  right ?  Like so ,  it would be excellent to make country calls ,  there when one wants I think it will come ,  because with that thing about the cards too ,  right ?  every day
it was expensive before .  did you remember before ?  to call the country of
And it is cheaper right ? 
and so I had to be keeping track of the clock ,  no ? 
yes ,  I've had ,  to be honest ,  I hope that technology keeps on advancing because I think that in ten  years ,  what else are they coming up with ,  right ? 
You know ,  this has to keep on advancing ,  right ? 
do you understand ? 
You have to look for cure to illnesses like cancer ,  eh ,  yes ,  you can go to the moon so ,  why can't they find a cure for cancer ?  Yes ,  it can be done ,  if they can do a
super fast computer ,  one can think ,  why aren't they looking for a cure for cancer ? 
Yes ,  how many people ,  right ?  Kills
And they haven't found a cure ,  have they ?  They haven't found it ,  have they ? 
Have you heard of a discovery of a cure for cancer ? 
I think not .  I think that that something will arrive that that God shows ,  for that will arrive something that can cure this cancer catastrophe ,  the age is not important but it will be ,  but it will arrive ,  right ? 
Oh my god .  In three days ?  Oh
