Hi good night who is it
Oh what are you studying
and you what are you stuyding
oh but are you here now
Ah sometimes I used to do that but no but , in , in which are you in what part of the library In
And are they products like individual or in groups
What
Too mu there is too much cold here right
yes yes yes Like this one what was I going to say , I at the , lunch hour I to the ladies where I work where I work three
Mm Where are you from
Ah how are you
yes music what do you think what type of music do you like to listen to
Why I don like music too exactly I like positive music not negative music
Oh me too Now I dance when Im alone cleaning the house Are you married
Hes very good Are you a bit cold
Are you a bit cold
Ricky Martin
What did you hear
You know is good tab
Are you a citizen now or not yet
oh there not are you happy with the residence are your parents
Ah ya Your husband is here in the United States or or Venezuela
What are they
Good evening How are you
Fine my name is Carlos Im from Houston Texas and you
How is it going
yes
What what do you study
and how has your life changed
Have you got them to speak now or not
In English
why not but it may be bad since my accent is understand
have you planned what you shall do for Christams or Thanksgiving
and you
what kind of car is it
eh
Whos there
Are you studying here at the United States
And right now youre married to is it to a Latino or to an American
Nice to meet you too Where are you at
Ah where are you
Joe
Do you have teenagers
Ay I was thinking my god how can it be Hey today we got a very difficult subject
Where are you from
I wanted to say that so later they have said a few stupid things no
and you try to tell the other person look its , like , this like , this dont , you realize And then they tell you no because you are
me too at the beginning there wasnt I didnt have access to that to that page . I said My Good could it be true what they are saying about Venezuela But I talked with my friends
Of course of course what do you do there in Philadelphia
Oh and do you think it is best over there than in Miami
Well my name is Ibet and you are
And what do you think aboout todays topic is it easier , to break with someone young or the age makes a difference
eh Im going to have 3 kids and building castles , in , the , air , and , when . he came once and told me you know what here we are over
That´s good It´s better What for Trouble to get in trouble
And you
yes and how does that happened to you
that of course you dont fully know right until you get married with that person but I think that I think
Fine and you
And you
NO Why do you know people there
Do you work
But definetively theyll have that option then And even eh , there , are , paretns that combine the signal language with the oral part No depending on
As I say if I fall down i just put myself up Whats the problem
Because what will we do with a mediocre relationship I dont want , a , mediocre , relationship , As , you , say , there , are , some , people , who , spend up to 30 years together and in a crappy relationship
yes
They they mistreat each other Like you piece of who knows what like whats that Why would I want
Right you just respect and
you think its easier
what do you say or when were super b
Hi hi how are you
Really
and his name and then came and went clear but more or less in the ninety one and you
English and then they have to go around but not , like , other people you know how in every place they are average
yes yes Of course
of course
yes but
of course for example in the rural areas of Georgia , you , would , see . things like you see the Ku Klux Klan I dont know
Oh yes really
Oh mm
And those weird things but is very very far from the city I mean
Eh
Eh
Oh Oh how weird
Oh I married a Gringo
yes I married a gringo thats how I came here And you how how
yes and so thats why we came to we went , to Seattle in ninety one I was about eleven years old
Mm
Oh okay
Mm okay
And so youre single now
Yes something like that I am like we live together
Oh okay
Well then sure
okay Ah look And whats this called do you like it or not
on they way from San Felipe to the Andes that is . like a question more more rural and you couldnt imagine how
Oh
typical Chilean countryside and I loved it
It was a village what do I know I like to be inside , the , city , because , I know theres more , going on like you know there are more things to do
yes I can Imagine
half
same in contact is difficult also
Here yes same but not so much Not so much Like when even at least less mall is not too big
Yeah ¿howre you doing
Yeah i think so youre in Texas and Im in North Carolina
Oh yeah me too
Uh Im covered through my husband
Uh uh
Oh well look were Were not
And the yeah And the other day i went precisely to , a an , office , in , which they supposedly give some kind of i mean pension for
people from the community right
Yes
And well the papers that they asked me with my , address , and , proof , of , work And finally , they , found . an excuse to not not giving it to me because they asked me
Mm
and and in my case I have a son with epilepsy
And then he needed some some emergency attention here things that
eh no No no They didnt want to give me ? the prescription Right So in the cases that press with . him he was in a bad way once yes He became worse
the costs of the cost of everything depends on demand , And , so if those costs keep on going up up and up
The money doesnt stop being like a drug you see They are already used to a certain amount of money
And then now suddenly they are not going to have it
Then the interest is wors
We would stop making bombs and going to war Look all that money that could be put
on schools or in a medical system social medicine
Mm Yes
yes Tell me twenty thirty dollars an hour
yes yes I Uh uh Then who in this case ? well it is offered In Canada I understand well they have much medicine no
No but the difference is that they started right
Yeah its like in Argentina my parents have their full medications paid
Uh uh
Yeah yeah yeah Thats the other thing you could at least try to pay something
in other places around the world Everywhere around the world
Uh uh
Uh and then uh we went to Argentina last year i went to the drugstore , and i showed them something that was over fifty dollars here
i bought it there for twelve dollars
Yeah yeah yeah
Twelve dollars the same brand and all
with some ingredients
Mm
Mm
Well what do I know apparently that things yes like that
But
yes
Uh uh ah yes
Ehm because they help the children
Mm
yes
Uh uh Uh uh Well yes look yes
yes I knew that Hey we ran out of time or what
yes Maybe I am making a mistake in not finding out you see it doesnt cost anything
And also if you call the Catholic Charities
Uh Uh uh That is true
There are lots of samples And but knowing a little bit more about , the , advances , Its , because . I can give out the medicine we think that one , diagnostic more profound could improve the lifestyle of my son with
because It had been under control but lately he has , as , close , to , two years that It has been disconnected He has been out of control
And well yes they gave him another one They leveraged ? him and it didnt work so by no means he had to take it off and return to the basics
what
yes yes you know it is matter of experimenting
well yes sometimes yes
all the time yes
life without you telling me is always pending all the time
Hmm
It happens in school and he feels really bad
seventeen
ah sure hes a teenager
Eh yes well returning to the subject I think he should try with some good
System of eh
With the doctors The medical centers that have medical schools
Uh
Sometimes the different departments there
yes
hmm
And we dont have that much money
Hmm yes
And they they make notes of what they give you And they charge accordingly Something that always is uhmm
Mm
Of month and that is is this interesting I had to make myself , an abscess , I it turns out that I have a thing that is called ADD
and they didnt charge me anything and they did all the exams
yes
I told them
Mm Uh uh Then they told me no well you , have to bring us information I had a letter about my income etc no
They didnt want to give you that information
Mm
Maybe now you can
Uh uh
Hello how are you my name is Juan
Hello well eh Mateo here
I am in San Antonio Mateo I think we had already talked you are in Philadelphia
yes how how have you been
no I didnt hear it what is the topic
the topic are technical gadgets I mean technology the gadgets , you , use , the , most , and , that , you depend on then and if how do you consider that dependence
it is the same that it is the same I was thinking clearly they should include it no
yes because it is a you know a machine
exactly well but I said well yes the automobile seems to , be the most important no it is then I thought maybe it is the computer but no
yes the most obvious one is the computer well but it is not the only
ah
but a tool like very personal seems to be the car no
yes and because of that the same thing you buy a , car and , you . are always using it and you always have to maintain it you always have it is some part of your life
yes yes exactly besides like I am here in Texas
Okay
I believe that here the car culture is something like a reminiscence of the horses culture also
yes
to to your life here take care of them and , the , is , as , important as lett say as the horse at that time no
yes
Some years ago and and well well if dont say . so in our time of communication the most important devices are going to be the related with communication the computer
yes because here in Texas yes but even there in Texas
but
yes
so
exactly and here working people have like in that times like a mule no they need a a a pick up a truck pick up
pick up truck right and listen and it does not , leave . them then is eh it is evident like it is a hard work culture very very important
right
of the most most important
yes but the cuestions on the topic were what
well for mi it would be more my computer and my cell phone
aham exactly
aham
aham
back then i didnt had a cell phone until i was like , twenty , but , now that a that i live in Philadelphia in , the city and that Im not always going back home fo
not always going back home for for you know seeing my messages
yes yes
well Im always always always having my cellphone
having your cellphone
i think its very its like surprising that almost everyone has a cellphone here in the united states
yes
and well on the computer were the messages there was , always . the internet the mails more than the phone the cellphone anything right
yes
the computer was the most important
but now
but now with the type of work that I am doing . the car is the most important the computer because the car is what permits re type of job that I am doing
well it is because the type of work well
LOT MORE SPACE
yes yes
for in the in the city having a car can be an inconvenience as well
yes yes that yes
because you have to try and park and have to pay to park , and , the gas station is not close and I dont know es
better to have a car I think
yes eh yes because of the distance I have to travel in my work the car is more fundamental
yeah sure
yeah
and that and eh and the uestion is if you , consider , that , you , are eh this technology becomes more a problem then then in
right
no here in Texas no there isnt where Im from , there , is not , major , problems , no , with , the parking there is a lot of space everywhere he hasnt presented
Lets say those problems here but in the end I dont know I dont know what , your , opinion is , above , everything , I . would say that well in regards with the cars matter of cars . and all that well it doesnt look like a big problem unless
we could consider a problem the interests created around the . motor industry and like so sometimes they affect the growing of technology
right but dont you think that that its very awesome that it changed in about sixty years
yes
a yes we seen how sixty five years ago there wasnt any cars but nowadays everyone has it
yes yes yes but yes
and the same thing with computers they have they have computers that wont go off the market for like ten years because
well
because they have those things very advanced and the things have not cumbri have not cum
yes
Exactly yes well like they say too with the motor . industry right if the motor industry would have advanced technologically , much like . the electronic industry then maybe an automobile will let us transport like
one hundred kilometers with one liter of gas
right
yes
that no most of them say that they are not . feasible and that in reality it is only a matter of image that the , companies , manage and when the time comes to see the the scoreboard
regarding hybrid automobiles well I thought that they were going to be much more , efficient I think that the efficiency they have achieved is minimal
yes
yes that was an important change
you dont think that it is an important change or
oh
a a according to the rules an economy car drives you it could be thirty six miles per gallon
aha
and a hybrid can drive you fifty
oh no ehm yes sure sure that there are cares around right now like the the Fords
oh so
OK
yes exactly but at the same time cars like this there are some small cars that give you , almost the same performance that hybrids and they arent hybrids no
by small cars news that are not in the North , American , market they are . in the European market or Latino American where they have to be more efficient
oh yes
it goes out more expensive have a car for the . initial spend and for what you can save in gasoline finally
its less that you have a car very low cost no
and why is that
European
because the united states is one of the ony nations that have this you only have big cars here you know
yes i am yes
there in other countries have smaller cars its good a different culture you know but
yes i just a few years ago the oil problem in the eighties or something like that i dont remember
OK
i thought i was having an exchange of culture because they started to develope little more here in the united states
yes but
i thought well i was going to have an exchange of , culture , but that was , nothing by . the time no it seems because they have a big cars they keep like
I am Ana Maria
Oh Faviola hi
Hi Faviola
How are you
Very nice sunny or cold
sunny and cold oh
cold
yes
I also had that topic before
I did not had that topic before and I had to , talk , about , it specifically the person I had to talk to talked about violence
mhm
No he liked the idea of going to see movies I told him the world is the world It has violence
mhm
Always had and have the experience to teach children abroad , peace , and , love , on , television , oh , oh , in , the world and later when they face the real world which is the school
You find that little kids hit him that they do , not , know how to defend themselves Moreover when you have only children
OK
then oh I find that it is good the classification they , have I believe that is the adults responsibility until when the children can watch television
I agree the maximum responsibility lies within the parents
The are doing their job the one who make movie and
they are earning money what is your job
in their business you
doing their business yes
yes now the one who wants it take it who wants to see . it do not want to see it is not their responsibility they see
of yes
that sells
yes
And is what they do it is not their fault is the fault of the ones who buy
yes the one who likes the product for that reason
yes
With you that is the most responsibility whether is in , violence , of , sex , of , what . ever you want to protect a a child in The , responsibility is of the parents even if there is a classification
Because if there is a movie classification for example PG thirteen
yes
If you have younger child and if you let him/her watch the movie is your responsibility
yes
exactly
So then because I the the association or or or whoever places places the classification already have it then
I think if imagine we think more or less the , same , in , that , Faviola . because at the end you realize that the responsibility or , raising . and take care and of what you want them to see and not see
Your children or your family Eh your mother or your husband like mother
MM i think i totally agree and the other normally , the children have access to television whenever parents are not home
Exactly
children are alone
mhm
And there isnt a father there to show or teach you cant view this view that
And if they make a sleepover you dont know either
Right no you dont have a clue
If they go a sleepover and they put a movie watch it in that house without control and whatever
You never know
Exactly
I think the important is give them one To respect that rules , and , if , you , give , them good principles at home Your family ans show him things
Right
Exactly that i dont like or i dont like it You must see if youre prepared the moment will surely come
Why because like they say you cant have them in a crystal box
No and besides
yeah exposed boy or exposed girl
yes and when they reach a certain age My son , had , around , 15 years and he tells me Dont worry youve the best you could
mhm
ah 25 % is the genes and education and the rest decision my life decisions
Look with that
Sure then I learned Oh wait no eh oh I was and
mm
My cell phone was ringing OK OK wait and Ill answer
OK
Eh dont hang up because we need to talk for twelve minutes
yes
It I only went to turn it off
OK ah
And about the people I think on the movies I love to watch horror films
Yeah
But sometimes that that Im scared Im a adult
You you scare yourself
I get scared and Im going to find out about horror movies
Yes yes but your responsibility is to watch it and you scare yourself
yes
Yes I dont like them and I dont watch them , I . dont watch any kind like that That is why its my decision bec even , if . I have the age to watch it if its too aggressive I dont want to watch it
Yes thats why thats why I respect what my son told me that time fifty per cent is responsibility
yes
of of the individual of the person eh you already , did , the , best , you , could , but it comes an age in boys before they are eighteen
Some are more mature than others
yes
and they start watching rated r movies
mm
at the age of fourteen and fifteen and eleven and twelve year olds are watching pg 13 movies
yeah right
and sometimes even kids and even younger kids because i remember my friend jenny had a kid that watched harry potter
yeah thirteen yeah
PG thirteen PG fourteen so i say jenny doesnt like that she gets scared
yeah
shes scared of monsters and all that
yeah
but i agree that the major part is the criteria that you , make of it to take care of them if they dont want too
yeah why why
not just leave them with the tv
but imagine if you cant control it
but its only tv
thats what i mean you can control it you need to be more mature it isnt true
we need to have criteria formed to watch movies
yeah thats why i said you dont get anything good out of watching it like at his friends house
aha in the same school they show them movies
Oh the same school but the same school is a , little , more , supervised because thats already another thing Because they have a purpose
They show them documentaries
But what I fear the most is when they go , to their , friends , house , And , they , sometimes have the , television , right , there , in , the , room which is so customary nowadays or the computer or whatever
And they have access to information without their parents without their , parents , having , any idea , And , they , are , in , the . room their parents think that they are listening to music or whatever
Perhaps they are watching something inappropriate Thats why I mean what happens is that if my daughter or son or whatever it is
faces that situation he has to learn to value himself , And , learn to respond to that , Thats . what I say in other words trying to instill in him the home values
Follow like superman the little boy that climbed on the window and got killed
of course because you know they are still not prepared
aha
eh did you read the rules that are in this phone game
yes Okay
yes yes yes Im getting ready Im already buying the gifts for the family . But now I have I have other things on my mind
is your birthday no
Buy something for the adults a little something either way Im going to make the majority of the gifts
Thats what I was going to tell you
Im going to cook yes ah
cook and boil To boil that thing you made that thing you gave me
Two days before Miranda
Andreita has her birthday too Oh three
Por te pre one of those screens where you draw and then can erase it
Ah how nice
Because she likes them she she already knows them and . she likes them she draws little lines and then she erases . them and I wont give the to her yet because theyre very small and shell put them in her mouth
But meanwhile youll give her the pencil and the screen
Ah how nice
But yes because little things like that
Im excited
Of course you see then Those things like that are nice , to . do so I bought the same thing for little Andrea And that was it
And you know who else has a birthday coming
On the same date
that I remember from when I was there
My father in law who
Your father in law yes
Him him Juan Luis Sandras youngest son
Oh yes yeah
Also on the twenty the twenty ninth I also remember that more , or less around . the same date I remember that they were all around the same date
I dont remember of his of being in I didnt know at least
I havent gone to any birthday to Sandras house I went , to only one but I dont remember to tell you the truth
Eh it was in April then when i went to Chile it was April
OK that was another birthday she has three
No but Sandra will not celebrate her birthday she wont have a party that year
no no okay
No she said no just for the family because theyre going to buy something better for the kid
yes its true
And really she makes parties that are too big
she spends too much yes
too much she spends too much on that and they cant buy what they really want for the kid
what they really want exactly
they of course They have to decide between one or the other , so yes this year the kid decided he wants just the family
The youngest of all
ah okay
And and he says I dont want any clothes
Poor thing
I dont want books only toys
Carolina
Tamara ¿how are you uh
Yeah ¿and you
Im in Seattle Washington state
Wow Im in Los Angeles
Oh yeah
Yes its just incredible
Yeah
Right now i was making a phone call and suddenly , i mean i didnt think today was sunday . i was more asleep than awake and i ¡Oh my god
Yeah this is i think this is my twenty three call
Oh ok ok yeah because i got an email that theyre taking . back people that are participating again uh because at first you could only participate once
Yes
Yeah i its
Its more like right tell me
not so `` Conventional ''
aha
Watch movies that are on on eh what do you , call it the festivals , there , we go for example the recently finished International Festival of Latinamerican Cinema
a pretty different message thats worth seeing but lately Ive felt like theyre making movies like to make them
uh huh exactly
Im from Panama
Ah okay Im from Venezuela
Oh okay
Aha yes
in then yes its true its true
We say thus to `` Macha '' no because good if they make , films , like , they , want ? to but yes they leave good ones leave and others if they dont leave dont leave but
Honestly no And the same is passing right now with the television We . had cable and now he just has a question of we , cut , it to a month because no I dont know suddenly like
that we put ourselves against what we saw that there was . a lot of manipulation of the average ones they only , pass the , news to you that agrees with them they hide the truth
eh then that is concerning those of the reporters and , the films , then , if thats not one film thats really very good very good
but then they repeat and repeat and repeat Ay My God What , is , this , we are paying , for this then its , like an annoyance right now we have like an annoyance with
with mass media we are thus reluctant yes yes
I think aha
Because whenever you see something or they give something to you well stupid
Exactly
or you have it or they exaggerate to you enough
Exactly
Ay maginate
And we were there and my husband you know this , white , man , paper . white compared to my father and my mother is white so I left more than my father so
when we left you know that he was American
Logical logical
exactly
exactly
exactly
because its not true and that
so bad what happened
oh yeah
no no he doesnt remember
I see
he was there and people was protesting Why the current President didnt do anything to remember the local victims
I think they were called Los de Richos Chinos That zone practically disappeared the whole town
of from Chorrillo
yes from Chorrillo exactly
yes thats were he was Thats were was the police or part of the polce
which happened a long time ago then they put it here , in , Venezuela , and , I dont know The Other day i wrote to one of the journalist
which is crazy what its really happening is that the press is , changing the information so he appears to be a monster a dict
ator well a dictator we have gone through four elections , and , for referendums i cant be more democratic But it is his personality his personality is
one in a million and people dont accept that Its . not a common man and people dont accept it then he is the first criticizing that
But specifically i watch the governments channel there the national channel , Because , the , other channels , are from . the opposition so of course its a little bit more of the same
from the whole world you compare this is what is , happening , there , ah and , that also , happens , with , the . radio we listen to public radio radio that you feel is
they are really saying the truth or at least you , have a , different , point , of , view . I mean we dont get the whole truth but sometimes its not as
biased as the other one I dont know I cant say that what the others say is
aha
false but they do manipulate the information
yes
I dont know if you
Hello
did you watch Im not sure did you watch a movie named `` Auto Fox ''
No I might have I dont remember
Its a documentary about Fox News
mhm
and well its about people that used to work there and , they said they were forced to , lie they quit , the channel and they got together and they started to complain
on a local level local to tell the world whats happening there in Fox News Its quite interesting its something like
`` The workers from Fox that are out ''
some
Something like `` out '' from outside
aha
and Fox of Fox News
My name is
Hello my name is Fernanda
from Washington
ah Which of the two
Washington DC
ah b
yes Washington State
ah already and the other
Yes I am here in the state of Idaho and I dont know if you know it
yes yes of course
if this truth because I see lot of that in . the movies a lot of truth in my view I dont really quite agree with them
they are not ranked very well you know Eh for , example , they , sometimes . say its PG and then you see it eh that movie and really
they have pornography sometimes and later itsPG thirteen Sometimes its not is more calm
and does not have as many things as nudity or , profanity to , be , true to those classifications for me its not like that sometimes
We dont know the people that critique these movies and we . dont know the classification o or we dont know what it was from your point of view
Yes I dont know much about the truth of films
aha
Lets say I dont have children or nothing like that then almost I notice
aha
But I think that the majority of television that are . lets say if you see during the mid day that is when a lot of times the kids are at home
yes
yes
Now lots of things are like normal that that I think it will not be
yes it is true because hm and is true because hmm one , time , well , I dont have cable dont have the normal channels the ones to see
mhm
And sometimes passing movies that really uf if a child , of , ten years old , or nine , was , in , the , house , and was . looking him it was changing also at the same time that I I
I stop in that channel they were things but very already adult
Clearly and
imagine for a moment what type of caricatures are going well . I remember that one time I was watching TV Pay attention in Mexico I am the city of Mexico
The channel here is 16 then I it was a caricature , in , English , because , already at night there is something in English something in Spanish
and it was a cartoon in English So I left it on , And , it , was . my mom well peaceful because she was watching a channel of cartoon
How horrible
She turned off the TV and she had to explain a ? little because my mom it surprised her because I had put on a channel of cartoons a normal channel
Then already the truth already no already the cartoons dont survive
Yes and that could happen to whichever child that was watching TV
sometimes the cartoons yes
And you can not be inside lets say if a kid , changes , you cant skip , or see , you , have to have faith that lets say at least during the day
Yes
The programming does not have any nudity or crudity or nothing like that
yes yes its true But there are not really the , cartoons sorry , the . Japanese cartoons are are those which have more classification eh have In Mexico eh
of that kind of television any channel the channels for example that is the five in cartoons
yes
for example then arrives at ten oclock at night eleven . and you can watch the TV and they dont transmit so unpleasant programs Well
in Mexico District mhm
before in Mexico But for example if you are watching , a cable , channel , you take the risk that the cartoon could be about something sometimes about some
I p yes and pi look I am from Colombia and I think that in Colombia neit
Then oh okay
the television is much better than here in that way
because ca can be lets say ten at night and , the , series , on , air , never , are , so . you dont take the risk do you to be too poor like here Here
Then her kid was watching eh the a cartoon channel , and , then , the , girl , thought , to , change , to , TV , and , em , and , wa other channel that was also programmed to them to kids
Aha but you could still see it and I got and told her to to her , mom , and , she , said oh there is not problem that is a channel of
of of cartoons of of they air programs And to tell , you , the . truth I was I was did not they did not , leave , much , to the . imagination It was really like the pose of well ehm it was an operating room where the woman was having her baby
Because they are twins she iss ehm both of them . are six years old And their mom was letting them watch that well each each parent lets them see what they
yes no
I think
yes it is of those for real those classifications they , give , And . n and n and of the mainly of the television The truth already already n
how much __ mom is at home and has her , small , children , of , three , four , years , old five , or , more , or they are , at home and they see they are watching her soap opera
and always ar they show scenes where they are the the a couple they are there having sex
Mmm
And during the day because sopa operas are on air from six in the morning until night
of course
And they are like that leaving nothing to imagination
Yes I
Then programs are now rated ans whatching a pornogrpahic scene in TV an any time is normal and for many
parents its becoming unfortunately normal
exactly
And I think that if parents talk to the broadcaster , and , demand for a more restricted television of this kind of scenes
I think it would be a little better But now parents , are , fine , if the children watch something like that there is not problem
if a movie has a sex scene or rude language for the buyers well they will laugh
and sometimes it brings attention because its a really strong scene Then those things sometimes help to
producers to sell
sometimes and
Then no Personally I like movies like I like Disney movies or
child movies I like them
Yes yes
Even if Im tired I love them I have some Disney movies here and honestly i dont like movies
of course of course
one really doesnt know how they will change
no no the truth is this is going honestly too , far , you , turn , on the television and if you you already see a commercial
of feminine pads and they appear there and they are , going , to , explain , there , how , and , in , a while they will put a naked woman and they will
show there how they are putting on the pad
exactly
but if for example a boy or a girl is , watching , it , and , you , say if , the . mom is there she can explain it to them in a good way and if a friend is there
and they tell them they can explain it with bad information so
then yes
like sometimes I see it and like you dont realize how much things have changed
Good night my name is Mariza from Philadelphia
Mariza Mariza
Yes its a very complicated and polemic subject
Right
Give an answer for And it ends up being some form of control right
They try to control the country through religion and it may seem positive , or , negative for a lot of , people , because , it helps , to pray , and/or believing in something for some it helps and for others
Right
That well they represented a whole project of ideology but . they really theyre one of the most conservative groups there are in the United States right
Uh yeah
So they had a power very well very direct very clear trying to influence people there at the church
At the sermon what specially caught my attention against the public schools
directly against public school and they prayed that god will rid us from public school some day
¿Really
Because if
Oh oh no
Oh yeah Ive heard that yes
No terrible they said ¿why are they harassing teachers that teach the bible to explain how the world was created
Exactly yes there are a lot of trouble yes
Yeah the right wing fundamentalists yeah yeah But also the , country is , uh the , party in power is . that everyone from the president to the everyone in it is on the white house theyre all right wing conservatives
The right to abortion the right to for example like , the other question to homosexuality gay marriages the right to believe
What was Charles Darwin theory of evolution And
yes
And is very complicated also of the other question was . over the homosexuality yes yes yes we all were the same or , believe the same it wont be problems like this he question
yes
On that sense the difference help to compliment
The talk the talk about homosexuality is very controvercial
mhm
But in one specific moment is not a oh lets , go , like , tolerancy , of , phenomenon of the , homosexuality , should be something that that in , which , need , to , be , very , well informed no I personally for example was not thinking that
No
hm so homosexuals or lesbians and Im very informed and , then , for that always I dont know why From what Im from when I was a girl so
so yes
yes
They should have the right to marry to live with anybody
mm
Like its a paradox not to be able to accept that they think differently but aha
What happens is this its that in this country that when children are , in , those types , of , families , the Christian , families , that are , right . wing lets say that those children are raised in a way that that starting . from birth they are taught that they need to be like this and this and this therefore
When they are older and meet people that are different , then , they say `` its not , like , that because they . taught me that this and this and this and you have to be ``
For example I was lucky to travel a lot and meet people , from , many . races from many cultures therefore I am well open to everything
And that is why when I see a person who is . not I immediately recognize it just with one glance I say this person is . not going to accept me because I am not like , her . I am not I do not think the same I do not look the same
the message is very clear it has been five years since , goverment , and , Bill . Clinton has been in Government well he was not as , he , was , more open of course he was left more open another person
Saying how things are done in the country and that is why . there is so much controversy with marriage there are also , with , the . supreme court with with the judges that want to be right also and that they are religious well yes
be or catholics or whatever they also want that they take . abortion rights and things then so it is it is ridiculus at this point in century
But this is why we are now
yeah and you have do you practice a particular religion
Me in my family we are In Spain Iam ca catholism lets . say soon as you are born they baptize you first communion and all that well got married in church
Yes but they do not have economic power that is the problem
mhm
Hi good evening
yes good evening
Whats up Alex
from Los Angeles
Ah very good I am Im from New York
Uh huh
Im here from Los Angeles
Pleased to meet you
Im from Peru
Oh okay
Eh Im from the Colombian residence
Mhm
Because here people speak Mexican Spanish
Aha
Thats why
One gets one gets the accent from where you live
With the when I was living in Spain I had the a the Spanish accent
Mhm
Mm Mhm
Ah thats good
Aha yes
Yeah sure aha
yes
and ah I have the D S L quickly now
Mhm
yes I love it because of the quick internet I dont like to wait for the pages
Mhm Ya aha
I like to do it quick and and before when I was when I had the line over telephone
yes
And so had I had to wait two or three minutes only for a page to appear
Yah ofcourse
its quick
Mm yes of course
And you
Well for me too of course and I work my jo , I , am , an , administrator and so eh my job for me the computer so
yes
So the truth is I have adapted very well and , have been , fascinated since . I have been using the computer well before they used this writing machine that was so slow to
for me its essential
moving day after day right
mm of course I think that they have they have made more advances in computing than they have done with medicine
Youre right
yes
wants he finds it there and so when one sits . well I use it for work but also when Im home and when I need
yes exactly
For everything because if you need to know how the temperature is outside well you go to the computer
News sports
Ah going out with women everything
yes yes yes
No and even this survey were filling right now I found it through the computer too
Oh that too yes oh
yes hmm then the computer has a lot of influence
in our lives 22 this is sh eh 22 calls
Yes yes
Because I spoke in Spanish then I think theyll accept it
Hmm yes
Because if you speak in English no they wont accept it
But the payment is made after you finish the 25 calls right
if you make a a call to replace another
yes oh yes yeah
I spoke to him I know this things owner
Yes i will ask if i have to replace him
Yes
Oh very good
Yes it is very easy to talk with him
Oh is he from California
No he must be from Philadelphia
Oh ok ok OK
But he gave me the telephone
Oh but you know him personally
No no no no
Ah just through the computer
yes i know him through the computer but he
through the internet OK
but he take part of the conversation with other people
Oh really i never talk with him
Ok then you can ask anything Hes chinese
Oh yes
Yes well he is the owner
Oh
the the manager
yes
Mhm
One in English and another one in Spanish
oh this is your second one yes
yes and this one that we are doing now is technology
oh oh
because its doing connections via the telephone
yeah yeah oh and the other one was the same twenty five calls
and that is technology Yes Something like that it was the same thing but it was in English
and paid the same
To speak Spanish
Of course
Mmm yeah
Oh yeah I see
Yeah
What we are doing now couldnt have been done twenty or thirty years a go
Because they are using multiple lines at the same time , to connect people that live in different parts of the country
I think that the phone technology has help in the , way that . I can make long distance calls and I dont have to pay anything cause you pay
ah yeah a monthly cost
yes
Oh but here in
And that wasnt that wasnt what it was like five ten twenty years ago
sure but here in the United States
Here in the United States yes
and they gave it to and meanwhile they charged me
yes Sure
Yeah okay
How good would that be right yeah that would be excellent , for , calling , to the country whenever , you , wanted . I think that if youre going to arrive because with one of those cards also right Every day
And now its cheaper right
Right now its incredibly cheap sure
That sure yes well yes
yes technology
Now you can talk for three four or five hours for five dollars
Before it was a minute oh my God it was like eight
A minute was twenty cents yes
and I had to be very careful and have the clock right in front of me no
yes yes yes I that has happened to me too
yes aha
that yes yes yes ah I know that what it is you must have the clock
Aha sure ah yes
yes but eh with with
What happens is that its advancing and and technology is already in the hands of of more people
Mhm Mhm
then services are cheaper because they sell to more people
Na sure yes
mhmm
for example the computer the computer five years ago was worth two or three thousand dollars
exactly yeah
today you can buy a computer for two or three hundred dollars
oh yeah thats true
since theres more demand
Now sure sure yes
thats true
hmmm
I want to sice more advancement in deseases I think theyre going too slow in that matter
hmmm yeah
I havent seen much advancement in diseases in the last ten twenty thirty forty years
Well
and they cant find a cure for it ¿right and they cand find it ¿right
Uh yes yes yes
Or or the heart illness too
Uh um AIDS its now spreading everywhere
AIDS is more advanced that cancer in in
Well thats true
in the way of being controlled because now they have drugs to control it
But cancer is going very slow i think
No no no no its true
I havent nothing
Very slow
They could improve on that
yes
yes yes
That shows up in any person
I I had a friend that died young she was , thirty , two years old and she got cancer from one day to the next
yes aha
and she died in three days
And and she died immediately she had luki leukemia of of the blood
Oh yeah
Oh my god
Mm
I havent no eh a
Hi, I'm Guillermo, How are you?
Hi, where are you from?
yes, yes, how about you?
At what University?
Oh, really?
sorry?
You live in Peru right?
i, sorry what so you mean?
Do you live in peru?
oh okay, so you're not an exchange student, you're transfer?
Yeah how nice, and what do you think until now ?
More than Peru ?
of- I, I, I will decide to carry fewer courses, I don't know.  You about how many courses do you take per cycle?
do you dedicate yourself full time to, to your studies?
You, where do you work?
Where is that?
Ah, in in in England, for example?
each system has it own advantages, but in Peru, how is in general?
Here they keep you writing all the time, papers and reviews, isn't?
Hello?
Hello, Gloria. I'm Paulina, where are you calling from?
Ah?
How?
¿What religion goes, is your friend?
Puero Rican.  But you grew up in the United States?
Yes.  You know, have you always been from Georgia?
oh where there is work, and what do you work in?
oh my god, yeah yeah, its a lot of work, right? i do children parties, i dress up as a clown, and now I'm trying to imagine, how to make elmos head.
oh really?
You know, have you been doing this for a long time, this?
Ah, really?
Really? Ah, yes. I think she is from Georgia.
Who, your niece?
Good night, this is Fabiola. Who am I talking to?
This is Lliorno, from Philadelphia, how are you?
Fine, thank you, and you?
Why?
Do you like to dance?
Ah.  And children?
Do you have a favorite singer?
Oh, where are you from?
And where are you from?
Where do you say you're calling me from?
Where do you call from?
philadelphia, is a city or a state What?
This is a city Are you in washington, D.C or Washington state?
hey do you hear me Do you like Ricky Martin?
How?
Do you have his new cd?
Uh?
What style of music do they play?
Have you listened to them?
Ricardo Montaner?
Who?
How long? How long have you been in the United States?
Five years? Do you speak English now?
Oh. Do you speak Italian?
okay, so your grandparents are born in italy?
Beautiful and you have animals, dogs cats something like this?
They do not allow animals ?
yes. and do you have anmals ?
and have any idea eh? What's the dog you want?
yes, How are you?
Very good, very good. What do you think about today's topic?
Okay. Eh, How old are you?
Okay. Pardon?
and you?
pardon me?
how?
Live, like in concerts?
OK.  Eh, what, what is your favorite type of music?
Do you have some kind of music you don't like?
OK.  And what, do you have a favorite group?
it and those eh you said that you play instrummenst,eh es-you your husband play like in a band a group?
well I ehm, I have an Ipod Do you know what the Ipods are?
and what is the best thing that ever happened in your life?
why? its all right about good themes, so we find good themes for talk when you speak there because they also put you the music that it was yesterday
are being, are they doing that to be laughed at?
children are entertaining, ahh they are growing, do you talk to them?
What?
if you talk, do you talk to the children?
Where did she learn to speak? Did she learn when she was in Chile?  yes then
I speak tothem in English, understand?
Isn't that bad?
is not good, right?
are you preparing the Chrsitmas presents and so?
what?
the Christams persents, are you plannig them?
and you do you have plans for Christmas?
really?
and what did you get her for her birthday?
a karaoke machine, do you use it or not?
eh?
the mouse has a calculator?
huh?
and you're going to be here for winter or are you going to?
eh the same as I think I tell him but how are we going to go if we just boug the house, how?, you tell me
eh?
and are they, are those curtains for the living room or?
ah you didn't install blinds?
Where are you calling from?
Where?
Yes, where are you from?
And you?
do you study or work?
I'm glad, but you're very happy i imagine, right?
hes young, hey, so, Why are you in the united states? have you lived here your entire lie?
Or you have, you have taught classes all the way through high schools or what?
I imagine that you have studied something like Education something like that no?
O what do you study?
exactly, now i said well, it's going to be the memories , i said, memories are as precisely the most important thing that can happen to you in life, because you live of memories, no?
sure, like the second part of the question, what was it? What would've happened in your life had you not done certain things, that negative or painful event
hmm your husband, Where did you meet him?
And, uh, and then you really understand why, uh, why they're like that and all that having a strong and very active character will help them accomplish, right?
Right?, well i have a daughter, the youngest one, that she's a little bit like that and she, aside from being very good at school, well, she's an excellent sportswoman
like give it direction, right?, um
Where do you live?
yes but of course that is what she is going to do. What did you study?
Well, my name is Claudia Ivette. Who do I have the pleasure of speaking to?
From where, you mean?
It is in a place called Robert East. And you, from where are you calling?
available in theaters right?
because also as well then if one says no turn around, no no you shouldn't watch that like then a a teenager or a kid, starts to, ah but why doesn't my mom let me?
What is your name?
yes, and what is your name?
Alex, where are you from?
Where are you from again?
Well, and what do you think about tonight's topic?
lots of movies, right? They don't have a sense of, many of them are about gangs, about lots of gangs or gang members, and they go to watch them because it's like
society, the parents, families, they have a lot to do with it, they should help the children understand what those things are and how to avoid them, right? I talk to my girl and I don't, when
if he wants to do that if he wants to have sex with a girl these are the consequences that that he might get-, what might happen, you understand?
they twist what is happening and then always I find myself with people who, for example, tell me damn, what do you think of the crazy man you have as a president? and
Exactly, that is what they tell me sometimes, "what are you doing here?
because, what do you do over here ? all right, could be same as you, thank God. You being here, and not in Venezuela
for really unusual high price, the people can't cope with that, they don't protest either, and i say, my God, what's happening with all those people?, like
however i tell you,  don't know, suddenly here, you live in Pennsylvania like you told me, right ?
and they said, no, girl, what is that? Look, and I, damn really, but look the power of television is
And, what are we going to do?  That is, work is the main thing.
Of course, of course, and fi- and come over here  And what do you do?
But, and do you have much time here in the United States?
Twelve?
Then, I also before saw the Americans like gringos, then this one, now i understand that don't, that they are Americans and united states, because that is another wrong concept they manage, no ? Then,
why?  Why?
Hello Mercedes, How are you? Where are you from Mercedes?
Oh, from Honduras?
Ah Where from?
And, where are you from?
Ah. Where from? The Capital City?
did you ever have a difficult break up?
yes?
what?
Are you married now?
Eh, What else? Let's see which other one. After that I didn't have any other formal boyfriend until S- yes, the truth is I never had any bad experiences I don't know, really? Thank God.
I think that must be one of the worse, I think, experiences, yes, I hope, I hope I never have to go through that cause we don't know, right?
it's impossible to have a perfect relationship, right? A situation in which
yes, one loves the person but it's impossible to be at peace all the time, that's what I mean, right?
Because one, then I, I am one, is a human being and one has to, things that bother to other people, right? and
yes, the truth I fe-, I think it has to be some truth, eh it's difficult eh, keep all happy, right? but
the drama is al-eh lots really? and then the people don't know how to get out the cycle of ,of abuse is what happens
And i told her, now your wearing glasses? and she had a black eye because her boyfriend hit her.
and then i said wow, what? how can you love a person that hits you? she sometimes came with bruises or sometimes
What's up Fabiola?, How are you?
Nice!, Where are you?
In the complete opposite, oh well.., Where are you from?
Where?
From Maracaibo?
Oh, I see, I see.  Well, you know that they have a stronger accent. No? It's like, look and you Mm
look and you  Are you arepa?
Hmm Oh Do you work at the Hilton?
Ah, OK, OK. Chilean, of course, no?
yes, yes, yes. Now I'm- it's important orally. No? I'm like in the mid- at the other extreme of the of, of, mm, of the, mm,
And ho-? To speak?
What do you think about, about the subject they gave us of the-?
eh, sometimes is a little bit difficult, no? But, I think love is the only thing that can make overcome these barriers, nothing else
are overcome, what do you think?
and twelve, imagine that, i mean we've had critical moments but, never enough to separate, and there's a time where maturity plays a big role, right?
Exactly, the luckily, well, the first time was horrible, I thought it was the end of the world. And well, there we stood and we weren't treating each other fine, until one day, i said, well, what's going on?
horrible, really horrible, I said, look, you know what?, I think
right?and there's some that say, that love, yes theres no love, no nothing.
of course of course, is your husband from chile?
and what, what's what you said?
Oh, how are you?
Fine, and you?
That's great, and where are you originally... ?
Right? Me too
And how long have you been living here?
and you, where you from?
from Santiago too?
and some time you are in this? call by phone?
oh yes?
Hello?
Oh, are you already calling everyday?
Ah, why union shouldn't be or why one doesn't want to do it?
Yea. Yes, and do you like it here?
yes, well. and as but roamed beyond people use as car or more action?
and they tried to speak to me in Arab, I don't know. They found my face to be more Indian or something, but of course. Is there discrimination there or no?
And how did you end up in Idaho?
oh really?
Hi, ¿how are you?, my name is Juan, Marcela.
Hey, ¿didn't we talk the other day with?
I haven't forgotten you. We practiced together, ¿right?, Hey, but today's heath.
¿Do you have insurance here?, ¿are you covered?
That's a problem, right?
We're not covered. It's a problem, because there's always something that could happen, right?
to give information about the person that was hiring me and at that time well, that person didn't want to give the information, no?
and didn't they give you, eh, the attention?
no? yes, he gave me. Then yes, it's something that we thing about that well, there should be some type of more flexible, no, in order to well in case there is for the community but it's a certain type of community.
because there is more demand and because people pay for it. And so the costs keep on going up because people ask for more money. And the people that work ask for more money, it's a vicious circle. And so how can you all of a sudden create a social medicine?
Exactly.  It is a problem, it is a circle that works with earnings here they are stronger, no?
With that.  Because here I don't know there where you are living.  But, here if someone has money it is nurses and doctors.  No?
Then.  Mm. And well here as they say, you see a good car with a woman who is thirty, for example, no?
All their medicines are paid, they pay a little, ¿right?, but very little.
It's expensive, ¿right?; And then, i don't know how the medications are here, but well, in Mexico they're cheaper and its more like that
no? yes yes and here there is only one. And secondly the literature isn't the best. And if it is only the laboratories, and I think that all the NorthAmerican laboratories well eh
Strong interest in all, no?
Why don't you put yourself in contact with an organization that is called Shriners?
with the epilepsy, right?
right? then you know one is always hoping that it doesn't happen. Well I don't really know what really is going to happen, but right it does cause trauma, but poor son of mine because he is a teenager so
Sure, because on top of that he feels embarrassed. Look, how old is he?
yes, it's a stigma. It's a stigma. What he has, no? then
How old is he?
yes. Do you know where you can ask around? in the teaching hospitals
they'll see people that, that can't pay in a normal situation, you know? Like us who can't go to a specialized doctor because it's too expensive
Ah, yes?
with the University. Ah?
no? wel not I.  But well then now I have my social security, myself.
listen, well all good this, what do you think about today's topic?
and how do you consider the matter of technology, no?, your daily life, if it becomes more of a problem than a solution or something like that
this includes, automobiles, cars?
aha, exactly but sometimes, eh, what seems like a more personal element depending on the case, well it can be the car, no? because the computer is more and more another tool
well more than, than, sometimes, let's say that it belongs to the institution in which you are, no? it is more a work tool
because, you have to be careful with the car and, you know?
did you use horses more?
no? is like a horse, it is something like very, very, very personal, very closed
eh, everything that allows the handling of the information and everything, right?
You need the car, you know? to, to work
really?, yes, yes
and the computers, well, in every home there's television, telephone and computers basically, isn't it? but but like there are other dimensions of the technological cuestion, then the automobile seems to be
ah, what a- what technical, technological question is more important in your life? that's what we're discussing right now, if it should be the automobile or the computer, what do you think?
because, you know? because i have my cell phone and I'm always with it
and, well I've grown accustomed to having a cellphone, you know?
yes notice that it is, it's verry important what you just said, some time ago when i was working i had a kind of work in which the computer was the most important thing, was it?
more phisical,no? then the car becomes the most important tool and the computer well, in a second plan even though it is also very important no?
well for me I believe that well you and you where around Texas and obiously you know that there is more how you say? i understand that there is more buildings and stuff around there you know?
is more of a problem then a help because a help but obviously you know? obviously
ah,yes?
but yes and in the city I believe the most imortant and depending on your work also well eh could be the computer no? then
the the other question o,o the tools of communication no? like you say the cellular.
well, what kind of problems could he have, right? like you said, with the car, the problems that have to do with the parking.
of transport, right? for example
charged their development costs, you understand me? I can't explain it very well but
right? and instead of costing like twenty thousand dollars, it would only cost ten thousand dollars.
if that was the case, no? but, like the technology, in this case the industry, has their interests well no, like it does not advance, no? you can see already what they are saying now about the hybrids.
no?, no, I don't think that they have a real, a real, ehm that it is really a change like that very importanttechnological given the efficiency that
pardon?
no, I don't think that it is that important at the same time that the efficiency they have proven is not radically different to the ones others have it is very little, no? you see, I say
the pick up trucks are good they are changing to be more efficient you know?
but the expedition those cars are big so they are expensive you know? only they can go twenty miles, ten and eight miles per galon or something like that that's a huge expense
and smaller no? then if we compare with the spend of a hybrid against a small Europe car or those that run in latinoamerica so
Good and yourself? How is the weather like in your house?
Over here weather is ugly, it is cold.  What do you think about the movies? Have you talked already about this topic?
is because you let him/her and you thought it could be, is that right?
I was asking myself, ah how is this? are you getting ready for Christmas yet?
What did you buy Miranda?
Yeah, who?
who?
yes, it's true, who?
Jua, Juan Luis is the eldest or the youngest?
Fine, fine. ¿Uh, where are you?
Yeah, you caught me off guard. But, ¿have you been participating long in this?
Didn't you, you got the same email, ¿right?, i mean, that apparently this will continue, you see, according to what i understood from the email they sent me.
Then, what do you think about what they show in the movies?
Say? Well I will tell you honestly, it's been more than a year since we stopped watching movies movies in the regular cinema and we move to the cinema
We moved to the cinema, for example in case of cinema, no? same as the one on television. Now we watch movies like Documentaries. Well... eh, with a different type of message.
upid, so dum that I felt bad to be there in the movie theater. I, well, what are we doing here? What a waste of time this is
What are you doing, right? I mean to watch that, really I prefer aco- lay down and go to sleep or I'd rather do something else instead of of, no I'm saying all of the movies, there are some that have a
uh huh, like great we have to make ten movies; we're going to make ten movies but it doesn't matter what? When? How it turns out, to the
forget about it, like we say, where are you from?
and say hey, weren't we there this morning? i don't remember seeing that this morning.
Hello Fernanda How are you? My name is Claudia
How are you?
Where are you from? Good. How are you speaking?
and you're from, where are you from?
I think that hm the Americans are, not like the mo- standard morals have decreased, You understand me? then
But for example, I had one, one time cable and sometimes was,well, what you like? ten in the morning, eleven and well I like to be changing the channel.
oh, yes?
well what they see. no? in that aspect. But, uf
The way things are going soon even the ones from Disney, perhaps will have pornography, right? So
Because sometimes they even draw it. I don't know if you've seen commercials like that. All the same it doesn't scare you because you're already big, right? but
and even one gets used to it, do you understand me? let's say
Maybe it's... Mariza, we spoke to each other a few days ago, right?
Hey, well, today's subject is, the matter of religion, right?
And against the theory, that they try to teach the theory about evolution, ¿right?
Right, they're fundamentalists, right?
yeah, more scientific right?, no, you don't have to believe only in what they say, they say god created man and woman, but also to give children a choice to believe
Well yes, but in this case, accepting differences seems to be related to humanity, eh?
Ah, how are you Carolina? You are speaking with Alex
Oh, okay, I thought that that, that you were someone else. Are you well?
Where are you from?
And you?
Columbian?
many many things, and and I don't like to wait for the pages, you understand?
The most essential, and mainly in the new techniques, right? the new technology that has arrived and every day new things come out, right?
write documents and forms, and all, now everything is done in the computer and the internet, right? it's something fascinating.
right, yes and for everything, right? that is it's everything that one
some information, but I sit down in the computer and there is not one to stop me, I don't know, it's like something, something essential and part of ones lifestyle, right?
yes, right. And how many calls have you made already?
But, but, who knows?
Oh, yes?
Oh, Do you know the owner?
yea, and you got paid also, the same?
And what kind of technology do you use? What we are doing now is technology.
And you know what? Some day they are also going to make international to you favorite country.
before it was really expensive. You remember how it was? To call to the country
And why is it so cheap? Because of the technology.
yes, I've had, the truth is that, I hope that technology keeps advancing, I would say that in ten years time, what else will they come up with, no?
Because all that must keep on advancing, no?
do you get me?
they have to find cures for like cancer, if you can go to the moon, why can't they find a cure for cancer? I'm sure they can, if they can make
a super fast computer that can think, why can't they find a cure for cancer?
It's  true, because how long has cancer been around?
yes, and how many people it kills, ¿right?
¿Right?, and that shortens life for a lot of people.
¿Have you heard about a discovery of cancer?
I wish, no? I wish that something comes out, that that God enlightens us, so that when they find something that can eh, heal, for this catastrophe that is when cancer comes, it doesn't matter at what age, but it comes, no?
Oh my God, in three days? Oh.
Hi, I'm Guillermo, How are you?
Hi, where are you from?
yes, yes, how about you?
At what University?
Oh, really?
sorry?
You live in Peru right?
i, sorry what so you mean?
Do you live in peru?
oh okay, so you're not an exchange student, you're transfer?
Yeah how nice, and what do you think until now ?
More than Peru ?
of- I, I, I will decide to carry fewer courses, I don't know.  You about how many courses do you take per cycle?
do you dedicate yourself full time to, to your studies?
You, where do you work?
Where is that?
Ah, in in in England, for example?
each system has it own advantages, but in Peru, how is in general?
Here they keep you writing all the time, papers and reviews, isn't?
Hello?
Hello, Gloria. I'm Paulina, where are you calling from?
Ah?
How?
¿What religion goes, is your friend?
Puero Rican.  But you grew up in the United States?
Yes.  You know, have you always been from Georgia?
oh where there is work, and what do you work in?
oh my god, yeah yeah, its a lot of work, right? i do children parties, i dress up as a clown, and now I'm trying to imagine, how to make elmos head.
oh really?
You know, have you been doing this for a long time, this?
Ah, really?
Really? Ah, yes. I think she is from Georgia.
Who, your niece?
Good night, this is Fabiola. Who am I talking to?
This is Lliorno, from Philadelphia, how are you?
Fine, thank you, and you?
Why?
Do you like to dance?
Ah.  And children?
Do you have a favorite singer?
Oh, where are you from?
And where are you from?
Where do you say you're calling me from?
Where do you call from?
philadelphia, is a city or a state What?
This is a city Are you in washington, D.C or Washington state?
hey do you hear me Do you like Ricky Martin?
How?
Do you have his new cd?
Uh?
What style of music do they play?
Have you listened to them?
Ricardo Montaner?
Who?
How long? How long have you been in the United States?
Five years? Do you speak English now?
Oh. Do you speak Italian?
okay, so your grandparents are born in italy?
Beautiful and you have animals, dogs cats something like this?
They do not allow animals ?
yes. and do you have anmals ?
and have any idea eh? What's the dog you want?
yes, How are you?
Very good, very good. What do you think about today's topic?
Okay. Eh, How old are you?
Okay. Pardon?
and you?
pardon me?
how?
Live, like in concerts?
OK.  Eh, what, what is your favorite type of music?
Do you have some kind of music you don't like?
OK.  And what, do you have a favorite group?
it and those eh you said that you play instrummenst,eh es-you your husband play like in a band a group?
well I ehm, I have an Ipod Do you know what the Ipods are?
and what is the best thing that ever happened in your life?
why? its all right about good themes, so we find good themes for talk when you speak there because they also put you the music that it was yesterday
are being, are they doing that to be laughed at?
children are entertaining, ahh they are growing, do you talk to them?
What?
if you talk, do you talk to the children?
Where did she learn to speak? Did she learn when she was in Chile?  yes then
I speak tothem in English, understand?
Isn't that bad?
is not good, right?
are you preparing the Chrsitmas presents and so?
what?
the Christams persents, are you plannig them?
and you do you have plans for Christmas?
really?
and what did you get her for her birthday?
a karaoke machine, do you use it or not?
eh?
the mouse has a calculator?
huh?
and you're going to be here for winter or are you going to?
eh the same as I think I tell him but how are we going to go if we just boug the house, how?, you tell me
eh?
and are they, are those curtains for the living room or?
ah you didn't install blinds?
Where are you calling from?
Where?
Yes, where are you from?
And you?
do you study or work?
I'm glad, but you're very happy i imagine, right?
hes young, hey, so, Why are you in the united states? have you lived here your entire lie?
Or you have, you have taught classes all the way through high schools or what?
I imagine that you have studied something like Education something like that no?
O what do you study?
exactly, now i said well, it's going to be the memories , i said, memories are as precisely the most important thing that can happen to you in life, because you live of memories, no?
sure, like the second part of the question, what was it? What would've happened in your life had you not done certain things, that negative or painful event
hmm your husband, Where did you meet him?
And, uh, and then you really understand why, uh, why they're like that and all that having a strong and very active character will help them accomplish, right?
Right?, well i have a daughter, the youngest one, that she's a little bit like that and she, aside from being very good at school, well, she's an excellent sportswoman
like give it direction, right?, um
Where do you live?
yes but of course that is what she is going to do. What did you study?
Well, my name is Claudia Ivette. Who do I have the pleasure of speaking to?
From where, you mean?
It is in a place called Robert East. And you, from where are you calling?
available in theaters right?
because also as well then if one says no turn around, no no you shouldn't watch that like then a a teenager or a kid, starts to, ah but why doesn't my mom let me?
What is your name?
yes, and what is your name?
Alex, where are you from?
Where are you from again?
Well, and what do you think about tonight's topic?
lots of movies, right? They don't have a sense of, many of them are about gangs, about lots of gangs or gang members, and they go to watch them because it's like
society, the parents, families, they have a lot to do with it, they should help the children understand what those things are and how to avoid them, right? I talk to my girl and I don't, when
if he wants to do that if he wants to have sex with a girl these are the consequences that that he might get-, what might happen, you understand?
they twist what is happening and then always I find myself with people who, for example, tell me damn, what do you think of the crazy man you have as a president? and
Exactly, that is what they tell me sometimes, "what are you doing here?
because, what do you do over here ? all right, could be same as you, thank God. You being here, and not in Venezuela
for really unusual high price, the people can't cope with that, they don't protest either, and i say, my God, what's happening with all those people?, like
however i tell you,  don't know, suddenly here, you live in Pennsylvania like you told me, right ?
and they said, no, girl, what is that? Look, and I, damn really, but look the power of television is
And, what are we going to do?  That is, work is the main thing.
Of course, of course, and fi- and come over here  And what do you do?
But, and do you have much time here in the United States?
Twelve?
Then, I also before saw the Americans like gringos, then this one, now i understand that don't, that they are Americans and united states, because that is another wrong concept they manage, no ? Then,
why?  Why?
Hello Mercedes, How are you? Where are you from Mercedes?
Oh, from Honduras?
Ah Where from?
And, where are you from?
Ah. Where from? The Capital City?
did you ever have a difficult break up?
yes?
what?
Are you married now?
Eh, What else? Let's see which other one. After that I didn't have any other formal boyfriend until S- yes, the truth is I never had any bad experiences I don't know, really? Thank God.
I think that must be one of the worse, I think, experiences, yes, I hope, I hope I never have to go through that cause we don't know, right?
it's impossible to have a perfect relationship, right? A situation in which
yes, one loves the person but it's impossible to be at peace all the time, that's what I mean, right?
Because one, then I, I am one, is a human being and one has to, things that bother to other people, right? and
yes, the truth I fe-, I think it has to be some truth, eh it's difficult eh, keep all happy, right? but
the drama is al-eh lots really? and then the people don't know how to get out the cycle of ,of abuse is what happens
And i told her, now your wearing glasses? and she had a black eye because her boyfriend hit her.
and then i said wow, what? how can you love a person that hits you? she sometimes came with bruises or sometimes
What's up Fabiola?, How are you?
Nice!, Where are you?
In the complete opposite, oh well.., Where are you from?
Where?
From Maracaibo?
Oh, I see, I see.  Well, you know that they have a stronger accent. No? It's like, look and you Mm
look and you  Are you arepa?
Hmm Oh Do you work at the Hilton?
Ah, OK, OK. Chilean, of course, no?
yes, yes, yes. Now I'm- it's important orally. No? I'm like in the mid- at the other extreme of the of, of, mm, of the, mm,
And ho-? To speak?
What do you think about, about the subject they gave us of the-?
eh, sometimes is a little bit difficult, no? But, I think love is the only thing that can make overcome these barriers, nothing else
are overcome, what do you think?
and twelve, imagine that, i mean we've had critical moments but, never enough to separate, and there's a time where maturity plays a big role, right?
Exactly, the luckily, well, the first time was horrible, I thought it was the end of the world. And well, there we stood and we weren't treating each other fine, until one day, i said, well, what's going on?
horrible, really horrible, I said, look, you know what?, I think
right?and there's some that say, that love, yes theres no love, no nothing.
of course of course, is your husband from chile?
and what, what's what you said?
Oh, how are you?
Fine, and you?
That's great, and where are you originally... ?
Right? Me too
And how long have you been living here?
and you, where you from?
from Santiago too?
and some time you are in this? call by phone?
oh yes?
Hello?
Oh, are you already calling everyday?
Ah, why union shouldn't be or why one doesn't want to do it?
Yea. Yes, and do you like it here?
yes, well. and as but roamed beyond people use as car or more action?
and they tried to speak to me in Arab, I don't know. They found my face to be more Indian or something, but of course. Is there discrimination there or no?
And how did you end up in Idaho?
oh really?
Hi, ¿how are you?, my name is Juan, Marcela.
Hey, ¿didn't we talk the other day with?
I haven't forgotten you. We practiced together, ¿right?, Hey, but today's heath.
¿Do you have insurance here?, ¿are you covered?
That's a problem, right?
We're not covered. It's a problem, because there's always something that could happen, right?
to give information about the person that was hiring me and at that time well, that person didn't want to give the information, no?
and didn't they give you, eh, the attention?
no? yes, he gave me. Then yes, it's something that we thing about that well, there should be some type of more flexible, no, in order to well in case there is for the community but it's a certain type of community.
because there is more demand and because people pay for it. And so the costs keep on going up because people ask for more money. And the people that work ask for more money, it's a vicious circle. And so how can you all of a sudden create a social medicine?
Exactly.  It is a problem, it is a circle that works with earnings here they are stronger, no?
With that.  Because here I don't know there where you are living.  But, here if someone has money it is nurses and doctors.  No?
Then.  Mm. And well here as they say, you see a good car with a woman who is thirty, for example, no?
All their medicines are paid, they pay a little, ¿right?, but very little.
It's expensive, ¿right?; And then, i don't know how the medications are here, but well, in Mexico they're cheaper and its more like that
no? yes yes and here there is only one. And secondly the literature isn't the best. And if it is only the laboratories, and I think that all the NorthAmerican laboratories well eh
Strong interest in all, no?
Why don't you put yourself in contact with an organization that is called Shriners?
with the epilepsy, right?
right? then you know one is always hoping that it doesn't happen. Well I don't really know what really is going to happen, but right it does cause trauma, but poor son of mine because he is a teenager so
Sure, because on top of that he feels embarrassed. Look, how old is he?
yes, it's a stigma. It's a stigma. What he has, no? then
How old is he?
yes. Do you know where you can ask around? in the teaching hospitals
they'll see people that, that can't pay in a normal situation, you know? Like us who can't go to a specialized doctor because it's too expensive
Ah, yes?
with the University. Ah?
no? wel not I.  But well then now I have my social security, myself.
listen, well all good this, what do you think about today's topic?
and how do you consider the matter of technology, no?, your daily life, if it becomes more of a problem than a solution or something like that
this includes, automobiles, cars?
aha, exactly but sometimes, eh, what seems like a more personal element depending on the case, well it can be the car, no? because the computer is more and more another tool
well more than, than, sometimes, let's say that it belongs to the institution in which you are, no? it is more a work tool
because, you have to be careful with the car and, you know?
did you use horses more?
no? is like a horse, it is something like very, very, very personal, very closed
eh, everything that allows the handling of the information and everything, right?
You need the car, you know? to, to work
really?, yes, yes
and the computers, well, in every home there's television, telephone and computers basically, isn't it? but but like there are other dimensions of the technological cuestion, then the automobile seems to be
ah, what a- what technical, technological question is more important in your life? that's what we're discussing right now, if it should be the automobile or the computer, what do you think?
because, you know? because i have my cell phone and I'm always with it
and, well I've grown accustomed to having a cellphone, you know?
yes notice that it is, it's verry important what you just said, some time ago when i was working i had a kind of work in which the computer was the most important thing, was it?
more phisical,no? then the car becomes the most important tool and the computer well, in a second plan even though it is also very important no?
well for me I believe that well you and you where around Texas and obiously you know that there is more how you say? i understand that there is more buildings and stuff around there you know?
is more of a problem then a help because a help but obviously you know? obviously
ah,yes?
but yes and in the city I believe the most imortant and depending on your work also well eh could be the computer no? then
the the other question o,o the tools of communication no? like you say the cellular.
well, what kind of problems could he have, right? like you said, with the car, the problems that have to do with the parking.
of transport, right? for example
charged their development costs, you understand me? I can't explain it very well but
right? and instead of costing like twenty thousand dollars, it would only cost ten thousand dollars.
if that was the case, no? but, like the technology, in this case the industry, has their interests well no, like it does not advance, no? you can see already what they are saying now about the hybrids.
no?, no, I don't think that they have a real, a real, ehm that it is really a change like that very importanttechnological given the efficiency that
pardon?
no, I don't think that it is that important at the same time that the efficiency they have proven is not radically different to the ones others have it is very little, no? you see, I say
the pick up trucks are good they are changing to be more efficient you know?
but the expedition those cars are big so they are expensive you know? only they can go twenty miles, ten and eight miles per galon or something like that that's a huge expense
and smaller no? then if we compare with the spend of a hybrid against a small Europe car or those that run in latinoamerica so
Good and yourself? How is the weather like in your house?
Over here weather is ugly, it is cold.  What do you think about the movies? Have you talked already about this topic?
is because you let him/her and you thought it could be, is that right?
I was asking myself, ah how is this? are you getting ready for Christmas yet?
What did you buy Miranda?
Yeah, who?
who?
yes, it's true, who?
Jua, Juan Luis is the eldest or the youngest?
Fine, fine. ¿Uh, where are you?
Yeah, you caught me off guard. But, ¿have you been participating long in this?
Didn't you, you got the same email, ¿right?, i mean, that apparently this will continue, you see, according to what i understood from the email they sent me.
Then, what do you think about what they show in the movies?
Say? Well I will tell you honestly, it's been more than a year since we stopped watching movies movies in the regular cinema and we move to the cinema
We moved to the cinema, for example in case of cinema, no? same as the one on television. Now we watch movies like Documentaries. Well... eh, with a different type of message.
upid, so dum that I felt bad to be there in the movie theater. I, well, what are we doing here? What a waste of time this is
What are you doing, right? I mean to watch that, really I prefer aco- lay down and go to sleep or I'd rather do something else instead of of, no I'm saying all of the movies, there are some that have a
uh huh, like great we have to make ten movies; we're going to make ten movies but it doesn't matter what? When? How it turns out, to the
forget about it, like we say, where are you from?
and say hey, weren't we there this morning? i don't remember seeing that this morning.
Hello Fernanda How are you? My name is Claudia
How are you?
Where are you from? Good. How are you speaking?
and you're from, where are you from?
I think that hm the Americans are, not like the mo- standard morals have decreased, You understand me? then
But for example, I had one, one time cable and sometimes was,well, what you like? ten in the morning, eleven and well I like to be changing the channel.
oh, yes?
well what they see. no? in that aspect. But, uf
The way things are going soon even the ones from Disney, perhaps will have pornography, right? So
Because sometimes they even draw it. I don't know if you've seen commercials like that. All the same it doesn't scare you because you're already big, right? but
and even one gets used to it, do you understand me? let's say
Maybe it's... Mariza, we spoke to each other a few days ago, right?
Hey, well, today's subject is, the matter of religion, right?
And against the theory, that they try to teach the theory about evolution, ¿right?
Right, they're fundamentalists, right?
yeah, more scientific right?, no, you don't have to believe only in what they say, they say god created man and woman, but also to give children a choice to believe
Well yes, but in this case, accepting differences seems to be related to humanity, eh?
Ah, how are you Carolina? You are speaking with Alex
Oh, okay, I thought that that, that you were someone else. Are you well?
Where are you from?
And you?
Columbian?
many many things, and and I don't like to wait for the pages, you understand?
The most essential, and mainly in the new techniques, right? the new technology that has arrived and every day new things come out, right?
write documents and forms, and all, now everything is done in the computer and the internet, right? it's something fascinating.
right, yes and for everything, right? that is it's everything that one
some information, but I sit down in the computer and there is not one to stop me, I don't know, it's like something, something essential and part of ones lifestyle, right?
yes, right. And how many calls have you made already?
But, but, who knows?
Oh, yes?
Oh, Do you know the owner?
yea, and you got paid also, the same?
And what kind of technology do you use? What we are doing now is technology.
And you know what? Some day they are also going to make international to you favorite country.
before it was really expensive. You remember how it was? To call to the country
And why is it so cheap? Because of the technology.
yes, I've had, the truth is that, I hope that technology keeps advancing, I would say that in ten years time, what else will they come up with, no?
Because all that must keep on advancing, no?
do you get me?
they have to find cures for like cancer, if you can go to the moon, why can't they find a cure for cancer? I'm sure they can, if they can make
a super fast computer that can think, why can't they find a cure for cancer?
It's  true, because how long has cancer been around?
yes, and how many people it kills, ¿right?
¿Right?, and that shortens life for a lot of people.
¿Have you heard about a discovery of cancer?
I wish, no? I wish that something comes out, that that God enlightens us, so that when they find something that can eh, heal, for this catastrophe that is when cancer comes, it doesn't matter at what age, but it comes, no?
Oh my God, in three days? Oh.
Hi, I'm Guillermo, How are you?
Hi, where are you from?
yes, yes, how about you?
At what University?
Oh, really?
sorry?
You live in Peru right?
i, sorry what so you mean?
Do you live in peru?
oh okay, so you're not an exchange student, you're transfer?
Yeah how nice, and what do you think until now ?
More than Peru ?
of- I, I, I will decide to carry fewer courses, I don't know.  You about how many courses do you take per cycle?
do you dedicate yourself full time to, to your studies?
You, where do you work?
Where is that?
Ah, in in in England, for example?
each system has it own advantages, but in Peru, how is in general?
Here they keep you writing all the time, papers and reviews, isn't?
Hello?
Hello, Gloria. I'm Paulina, where are you calling from?
Ah?
How?
¿What religion goes, is your friend?
Puero Rican.  But you grew up in the United States?
Yes.  You know, have you always been from Georgia?
oh where there is work, and what do you work in?
oh my god, yeah yeah, its a lot of work, right? i do children parties, i dress up as a clown, and now I'm trying to imagine, how to make elmos head.
oh really?
You know, have you been doing this for a long time, this?
Ah, really?
Really? Ah, yes. I think she is from Georgia.
Who, your niece?
Good night, this is Fabiola. Who am I talking to?
This is Lliorno, from Philadelphia, how are you?
Fine, thank you, and you?
Why?
Do you like to dance?
Ah.  And children?
Do you have a favorite singer?
Oh, where are you from?
And where are you from?
Where do you say you're calling me from?
Where do you call from?
philadelphia, is a city or a state What?
This is a city Are you in washington, D.C or Washington state?
hey do you hear me Do you like Ricky Martin?
How?
Do you have his new cd?
Uh?
What style of music do they play?
Have you listened to them?
Ricardo Montaner?
Who?
How long? How long have you been in the United States?
Five years? Do you speak English now?
Oh. Do you speak Italian?
okay, so your grandparents are born in italy?
Beautiful and you have animals, dogs cats something like this?
They do not allow animals ?
yes. and do you have anmals ?
and have any idea eh? What's the dog you want?
yes, How are you?
Very good, very good. What do you think about today's topic?
Okay. Eh, How old are you?
Okay. Pardon?
and you?
pardon me?
how?
Live, like in concerts?
OK.  Eh, what, what is your favorite type of music?
Do you have some kind of music you don't like?
OK.  And what, do you have a favorite group?
it and those eh you said that you play instrummenst,eh es-you your husband play like in a band a group?
well I ehm, I have an Ipod Do you know what the Ipods are?
and what is the best thing that ever happened in your life?
why? its all right about good themes, so we find good themes for talk when you speak there because they also put you the music that it was yesterday
are being, are they doing that to be laughed at?
children are entertaining, ahh they are growing, do you talk to them?
What?
if you talk, do you talk to the children?
Where did she learn to speak? Did she learn when she was in Chile?  yes then
I speak tothem in English, understand?
Isn't that bad?
is not good, right?
are you preparing the Chrsitmas presents and so?
what?
the Christams persents, are you plannig them?
and you do you have plans for Christmas?
really?
and what did you get her for her birthday?
a karaoke machine, do you use it or not?
eh?
the mouse has a calculator?
huh?
and you're going to be here for winter or are you going to?
eh the same as I think I tell him but how are we going to go if we just boug the house, how?, you tell me
eh?
and are they, are those curtains for the living room or?
ah you didn't install blinds?
Where are you calling from?
Where?
Yes, where are you from?
And you?
do you study or work?
I'm glad, but you're very happy i imagine, right?
hes young, hey, so, Why are you in the united states? have you lived here your entire lie?
Or you have, you have taught classes all the way through high schools or what?
I imagine that you have studied something like Education something like that no?
O what do you study?
exactly, now i said well, it's going to be the memories , i said, memories are as precisely the most important thing that can happen to you in life, because you live of memories, no?
sure, like the second part of the question, what was it? What would've happened in your life had you not done certain things, that negative or painful event
hmm your husband, Where did you meet him?
And, uh, and then you really understand why, uh, why they're like that and all that having a strong and very active character will help them accomplish, right?
Right?, well i have a daughter, the youngest one, that she's a little bit like that and she, aside from being very good at school, well, she's an excellent sportswoman
like give it direction, right?, um
Where do you live?
yes but of course that is what she is going to do. What did you study?
Well, my name is Claudia Ivette. Who do I have the pleasure of speaking to?
From where, you mean?
It is in a place called Robert East. And you, from where are you calling?
available in theaters right?
because also as well then if one says no turn around, no no you shouldn't watch that like then a a teenager or a kid, starts to, ah but why doesn't my mom let me?
What is your name?
yes, and what is your name?
Alex, where are you from?
Where are you from again?
Well, and what do you think about tonight's topic?
lots of movies, right? They don't have a sense of, many of them are about gangs, about lots of gangs or gang members, and they go to watch them because it's like
society, the parents, families, they have a lot to do with it, they should help the children understand what those things are and how to avoid them, right? I talk to my girl and I don't, when
if he wants to do that if he wants to have sex with a girl these are the consequences that that he might get-, what might happen, you understand?
they twist what is happening and then always I find myself with people who, for example, tell me damn, what do you think of the crazy man you have as a president? and
Exactly, that is what they tell me sometimes, "what are you doing here?
because, what do you do over here ? all right, could be same as you, thank God. You being here, and not in Venezuela
for really unusual high price, the people can't cope with that, they don't protest either, and i say, my God, what's happening with all those people?, like
however i tell you,  don't know, suddenly here, you live in Pennsylvania like you told me, right ?
and they said, no, girl, what is that? Look, and I, damn really, but look the power of television is
And, what are we going to do?  That is, work is the main thing.
Of course, of course, and fi- and come over here  And what do you do?
But, and do you have much time here in the United States?
Twelve?
Then, I also before saw the Americans like gringos, then this one, now i understand that don't, that they are Americans and united states, because that is another wrong concept they manage, no ? Then,
why?  Why?
Hello Mercedes, How are you? Where are you from Mercedes?
Oh, from Honduras?
Ah Where from?
And, where are you from?
Ah. Where from? The Capital City?
did you ever have a difficult break up?
yes?
what?
Are you married now?
Eh, What else? Let's see which other one. After that I didn't have any other formal boyfriend until S- yes, the truth is I never had any bad experiences I don't know, really? Thank God.
I think that must be one of the worse, I think, experiences, yes, I hope, I hope I never have to go through that cause we don't know, right?
it's impossible to have a perfect relationship, right? A situation in which
yes, one loves the person but it's impossible to be at peace all the time, that's what I mean, right?
Because one, then I, I am one, is a human being and one has to, things that bother to other people, right? and
yes, the truth I fe-, I think it has to be some truth, eh it's difficult eh, keep all happy, right? but
the drama is al-eh lots really? and then the people don't know how to get out the cycle of ,of abuse is what happens
And i told her, now your wearing glasses? and she had a black eye because her boyfriend hit her.
and then i said wow, what? how can you love a person that hits you? she sometimes came with bruises or sometimes
What's up Fabiola?, How are you?
Nice!, Where are you?
In the complete opposite, oh well.., Where are you from?
Where?
From Maracaibo?
Oh, I see, I see.  Well, you know that they have a stronger accent. No? It's like, look and you Mm
look and you  Are you arepa?
Hmm Oh Do you work at the Hilton?
Ah, OK, OK. Chilean, of course, no?
yes, yes, yes. Now I'm- it's important orally. No? I'm like in the mid- at the other extreme of the of, of, mm, of the, mm,
And ho-? To speak?
What do you think about, about the subject they gave us of the-?
eh, sometimes is a little bit difficult, no? But, I think love is the only thing that can make overcome these barriers, nothing else
are overcome, what do you think?
and twelve, imagine that, i mean we've had critical moments but, never enough to separate, and there's a time where maturity plays a big role, right?
Exactly, the luckily, well, the first time was horrible, I thought it was the end of the world. And well, there we stood and we weren't treating each other fine, until one day, i said, well, what's going on?
horrible, really horrible, I said, look, you know what?, I think
right?and there's some that say, that love, yes theres no love, no nothing.
of course of course, is your husband from chile?
and what, what's what you said?
Oh, how are you?
Fine, and you?
That's great, and where are you originally... ?
Right? Me too
And how long have you been living here?
and you, where you from?
from Santiago too?
and some time you are in this? call by phone?
oh yes?
Hello?
Oh, are you already calling everyday?
Ah, why union shouldn't be or why one doesn't want to do it?
Yea. Yes, and do you like it here?
yes, well. and as but roamed beyond people use as car or more action?
and they tried to speak to me in Arab, I don't know. They found my face to be more Indian or something, but of course. Is there discrimination there or no?
And how did you end up in Idaho?
oh really?
Hi, ¿how are you?, my name is Juan, Marcela.
Hey, ¿didn't we talk the other day with?
I haven't forgotten you. We practiced together, ¿right?, Hey, but today's heath.
¿Do you have insurance here?, ¿are you covered?
That's a problem, right?
We're not covered. It's a problem, because there's always something that could happen, right?
to give information about the person that was hiring me and at that time well, that person didn't want to give the information, no?
and didn't they give you, eh, the attention?
no? yes, he gave me. Then yes, it's something that we thing about that well, there should be some type of more flexible, no, in order to well in case there is for the community but it's a certain type of community.
because there is more demand and because people pay for it. And so the costs keep on going up because people ask for more money. And the people that work ask for more money, it's a vicious circle. And so how can you all of a sudden create a social medicine?
Exactly.  It is a problem, it is a circle that works with earnings here they are stronger, no?
With that.  Because here I don't know there where you are living.  But, here if someone has money it is nurses and doctors.  No?
Then.  Mm. And well here as they say, you see a good car with a woman who is thirty, for example, no?
All their medicines are paid, they pay a little, ¿right?, but very little.
It's expensive, ¿right?; And then, i don't know how the medications are here, but well, in Mexico they're cheaper and its more like that
no? yes yes and here there is only one. And secondly the literature isn't the best. And if it is only the laboratories, and I think that all the NorthAmerican laboratories well eh
Strong interest in all, no?
Why don't you put yourself in contact with an organization that is called Shriners?
with the epilepsy, right?
right? then you know one is always hoping that it doesn't happen. Well I don't really know what really is going to happen, but right it does cause trauma, but poor son of mine because he is a teenager so
Sure, because on top of that he feels embarrassed. Look, how old is he?
yes, it's a stigma. It's a stigma. What he has, no? then
How old is he?
yes. Do you know where you can ask around? in the teaching hospitals
they'll see people that, that can't pay in a normal situation, you know? Like us who can't go to a specialized doctor because it's too expensive
Ah, yes?
with the University. Ah?
no? wel not I.  But well then now I have my social security, myself.
listen, well all good this, what do you think about today's topic?
and how do you consider the matter of technology, no?, your daily life, if it becomes more of a problem than a solution or something like that
this includes, automobiles, cars?
aha, exactly but sometimes, eh, what seems like a more personal element depending on the case, well it can be the car, no? because the computer is more and more another tool
well more than, than, sometimes, let's say that it belongs to the institution in which you are, no? it is more a work tool
because, you have to be careful with the car and, you know?
did you use horses more?
no? is like a horse, it is something like very, very, very personal, very closed
eh, everything that allows the handling of the information and everything, right?
You need the car, you know? to, to work
really?, yes, yes
and the computers, well, in every home there's television, telephone and computers basically, isn't it? but but like there are other dimensions of the technological cuestion, then the automobile seems to be
ah, what a- what technical, technological question is more important in your life? that's what we're discussing right now, if it should be the automobile or the computer, what do you think?
because, you know? because i have my cell phone and I'm always with it
and, well I've grown accustomed to having a cellphone, you know?
yes notice that it is, it's verry important what you just said, some time ago when i was working i had a kind of work in which the computer was the most important thing, was it?
more phisical,no? then the car becomes the most important tool and the computer well, in a second plan even though it is also very important no?
well for me I believe that well you and you where around Texas and obiously you know that there is more how you say? i understand that there is more buildings and stuff around there you know?
is more of a problem then a help because a help but obviously you know? obviously
ah,yes?
but yes and in the city I believe the most imortant and depending on your work also well eh could be the computer no? then
the the other question o,o the tools of communication no? like you say the cellular.
well, what kind of problems could he have, right? like you said, with the car, the problems that have to do with the parking.
of transport, right? for example
charged their development costs, you understand me? I can't explain it very well but
right? and instead of costing like twenty thousand dollars, it would only cost ten thousand dollars.
if that was the case, no? but, like the technology, in this case the industry, has their interests well no, like it does not advance, no? you can see already what they are saying now about the hybrids.
no?, no, I don't think that they have a real, a real, ehm that it is really a change like that very importanttechnological given the efficiency that
pardon?
no, I don't think that it is that important at the same time that the efficiency they have proven is not radically different to the ones others have it is very little, no? you see, I say
the pick up trucks are good they are changing to be more efficient you know?
but the expedition those cars are big so they are expensive you know? only they can go twenty miles, ten and eight miles per galon or something like that that's a huge expense
and smaller no? then if we compare with the spend of a hybrid against a small Europe car or those that run in latinoamerica so
Good and yourself? How is the weather like in your house?
Over here weather is ugly, it is cold.  What do you think about the movies? Have you talked already about this topic?
is because you let him/her and you thought it could be, is that right?
I was asking myself, ah how is this? are you getting ready for Christmas yet?
What did you buy Miranda?
Yeah, who?
who?
yes, it's true, who?
Jua, Juan Luis is the eldest or the youngest?
Fine, fine. ¿Uh, where are you?
Yeah, you caught me off guard. But, ¿have you been participating long in this?
Didn't you, you got the same email, ¿right?, i mean, that apparently this will continue, you see, according to what i understood from the email they sent me.
Then, what do you think about what they show in the movies?
Say? Well I will tell you honestly, it's been more than a year since we stopped watching movies movies in the regular cinema and we move to the cinema
We moved to the cinema, for example in case of cinema, no? same as the one on television. Now we watch movies like Documentaries. Well... eh, with a different type of message.
upid, so dum that I felt bad to be there in the movie theater. I, well, what are we doing here? What a waste of time this is
What are you doing, right? I mean to watch that, really I prefer aco- lay down and go to sleep or I'd rather do something else instead of of, no I'm saying all of the movies, there are some that have a
uh huh, like great we have to make ten movies; we're going to make ten movies but it doesn't matter what? When? How it turns out, to the
forget about it, like we say, where are you from?
and say hey, weren't we there this morning? i don't remember seeing that this morning.
Hello Fernanda How are you? My name is Claudia
How are you?
Where are you from? Good. How are you speaking?
and you're from, where are you from?
I think that hm the Americans are, not like the mo- standard morals have decreased, You understand me? then
But for example, I had one, one time cable and sometimes was,well, what you like? ten in the morning, eleven and well I like to be changing the channel.
oh, yes?
well what they see. no? in that aspect. But, uf
The way things are going soon even the ones from Disney, perhaps will have pornography, right? So
Because sometimes they even draw it. I don't know if you've seen commercials like that. All the same it doesn't scare you because you're already big, right? but
and even one gets used to it, do you understand me? let's say
Maybe it's... Mariza, we spoke to each other a few days ago, right?
Hey, well, today's subject is, the matter of religion, right?
And against the theory, that they try to teach the theory about evolution, ¿right?
Right, they're fundamentalists, right?
yeah, more scientific right?, no, you don't have to believe only in what they say, they say god created man and woman, but also to give children a choice to believe
Well yes, but in this case, accepting differences seems to be related to humanity, eh?
Ah, how are you Carolina? You are speaking with Alex
Oh, okay, I thought that that, that you were someone else. Are you well?
Where are you from?
And you?
Columbian?
many many things, and and I don't like to wait for the pages, you understand?
The most essential, and mainly in the new techniques, right? the new technology that has arrived and every day new things come out, right?
write documents and forms, and all, now everything is done in the computer and the internet, right? it's something fascinating.
right, yes and for everything, right? that is it's everything that one
some information, but I sit down in the computer and there is not one to stop me, I don't know, it's like something, something essential and part of ones lifestyle, right?
yes, right. And how many calls have you made already?
But, but, who knows?
Oh, yes?
Oh, Do you know the owner?
yea, and you got paid also, the same?
And what kind of technology do you use? What we are doing now is technology.
And you know what? Some day they are also going to make international to you favorite country.
before it was really expensive. You remember how it was? To call to the country
And why is it so cheap? Because of the technology.
yes, I've had, the truth is that, I hope that technology keeps advancing, I would say that in ten years time, what else will they come up with, no?
Because all that must keep on advancing, no?
do you get me?
they have to find cures for like cancer, if you can go to the moon, why can't they find a cure for cancer? I'm sure they can, if they can make
a super fast computer that can think, why can't they find a cure for cancer?
It's  true, because how long has cancer been around?
yes, and how many people it kills, ¿right?
¿Right?, and that shortens life for a lot of people.
¿Have you heard about a discovery of cancer?
I wish, no? I wish that something comes out, that that God enlightens us, so that when they find something that can eh, heal, for this catastrophe that is when cancer comes, it doesn't matter at what age, but it comes, no?
Oh my God, in three days? Oh.
