Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
With whom am I speaking  ?  
Eh  ,   Silvia  ,   yes  .    What is your name  ?  
Nice to meet you  .    Em  ,   and where are you from  ?  
Aha  .    yes  .    And where are you from  ?  
And you  ,   what country are you from  ?  
What  ,   from what part of Cuba are you  ?  
Ah  .   And from which  ,   which neighborhood  ?  
From Miramar  .   And him  ?  
Well  ,   look  ,   that eh  ,   Your parents  ,   how long have they been married  ?  
Are you married  ?  
No  ,   I used to be but I got divorced about ten years ago  .   What about you  ?  
yes  ,   what do you think about the changes that have taken place in the marriage institution over the past twenty to thirty years  ?   They want us to speak about marriages  .  
Changes in marriage  ?   Well  ,   I believe that  ,   in general  ,   they've been  ,   I mean  ,   they've been  ,   oh  ,   it has improved  .   Eh  ,  
em  ,   people  ,   looked and me and said  ,   look  ,   you have a good family  .    Why did you leave home to live alone  ?   Like  ,   she didn't go to live with a boyfriend  ,   to live
We're here in New York  ,   and you  ?  
Exactly  .    And where are you from  ?  
I'm Colombian  .    And you  ?  
And how did the Colombians get so far from home  ?  
ah  ,   well  ,   how nice  .    And you like  ,   you like Washington  ?  
I don't really now much about  ,   how is it said  ?  
three thousand calls they got  ,   50% was married or not divorce  ,   etc  ,   so I don't really now  ,   are you married  ?  
Oh nice  ,   and family  ?    ,   kids  ?  
oh nice  ,   really nice and the one year older  ,   does he sleep good at night  ?  
They say that milk has a  ,   a chemical  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   that helps  ,   to  ,   to sleep so  ,   when you can't sleep well  ,   you drink a glass of warm milk  .  
No because they have  ,   so many hours since you gave him the last milk and well  ,   at his age  ,   he still has trouble with teeth too  ,   ¿right  ?  
i don't know  ,   to  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   we take her to the park to run  ,   to get plenty tired
so  ,   Elena says  ,   what's this  ?   and the book says  ,   its a bus  .   And what's this  ,   this is a car  ,   this is the kitchen  ,   this is a towel  .  
Where are you going  ,   to Virginia  ?  
Ah  ,   that's good  ,   ah  ,   you are going to like it  ,    you have been there before  ,   haven't you  ?  
You haven't  ?   You're going to like it  ,   Virginia is so pretty and it's not that far away from the beach  ,   just a bit  ,   not that far away from the beach and
there's not much to do  ,   almost everything oh go out  ,   or go out you know to ride  ,   or climb mountains  ,   or everything more than anything nature stuff  ,   there's not much diversity  ,   you understand  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Or of any other thing  .   What do you want to talk about  ,   about what  ,   what happened with Katrina  ,   or of what do you want  ?  
Oh  ,   we can talk about marriage  ,   it doesn't matter  .   Are you married  ?  
You  ?  
Eighteen  ?  
Latin  ?   Oh  ,   I'm also Latin  .  
What  ?  
what  ?   Panamanian  ?   Oh  ,   I'm Puerto Rican  .  
Same  ,   what's up  ?  
Oh  ,   so  .   And  ,   then you what do you think about marriage  ?   You're never going to get married or  ,  
you think what  ?  
That's how it is  .   And do you work  ?  
Hm Hm  .   and your husband  ?  
What's he going to be  ?  
Oh  ,   where  ?  
And you what did you used to do  ?  
And  ,   why  ?  
Aha So you do a little of everything  ,   right  ?  
Yeah  ,   and you  ,   do you have a tattoo  ?  
Hm mm How did you hear about this survey  ?  
Which one was the first you did  ?  
And how much did you get paid for that  ?  
One hundred seventy two  ?  
Oh  ,   for each one  ?  
Eh  ,   and for the first one  ?   how much  ?  
But I think that was for the Spanish calls I made  ,   because I didn't even know  ,   I was surprised when I went to check my email  ,   I went 'what  ?  ' a fifty dollars check  ,   OK fine
And I thought 'what will this be for  ?  ' but I cashed it
Yes  ,   do yo have any  ?  
Yes  ,   I am here trying to find someone for him  .   Because he is working right now  ,   like me  ,   do you know who has experience  ?  
Yes  ,   where do you search them  ,   on the computer  ?  
In  ,   do you use the Internet  ?  
And what do you do in the Internet  ?  
Hm  ,   what  ,   which Internet provider do you use  ?  
Doesn't your husband get jealous  ?  
It's not an issue  ,   so yes  ,   how old is your daughter  ?  
Okay  ,   what  ,   what are you like  ?  
And what  ,   what are you like  ?  
Like what  ?  
Like  ,   like what do you look like  ?  
¿You  ?  
Uh um  ,   yeah  ,   i spend all day playing with my children  ,   so  ,   in all of this  .   Every time  ,   and  ,   ¿where are you  ?    ,   ¿you are  ,   uh  ,   where  ?  
¿What  ,   where  ?  
¿Where in the United States are you  ?  
¿And you are  ?  
Uh um  ,   ¿and when will you go there  ,   to your country again  ?  
how are you  ?  
good thanks  ,   my name is Carmen from Chicago  .   And you  ?  
how long have you been married  ?  
Oh  ,   but you have a lot of communication with your second husband  ,   ¿right  ?  
¿do you have children  ?    ,   oh wow  ,   from the first  ,   and what from the second  ?  
and  ,   and do you communicate a lot with your kids  ?    Yes thank god I too
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   do you work  ?  
and does your husband work  ?   okay but
aha aha and you told me you were from Nebraska  ?  
in Chicago  ?   where  ?  
and what nationality are you  ?  
what  ?  
what nationality are you  ?  
and not before  ?  
no  ?   you didn't get along well  ?  
and how did you last that long with him  ?  
aha  ,   aha  ,   and you like your kids  ?    Or like his family
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hi  ,   How are you  ?  
Ah  ,   fine  ,   my name is Yahaira  ,   What's your name  ?  
oh  ,   okay  ,   Ah  ,   today's topic is marriage  .   Right  ?  
Oh  ,   okay  .   Okay  ,   um  ,   In what state are you  ,   Johnny  ?  
Pardon  ?  
In what state are you  ?  
New York  .   And you  ?  
I don't know  .   What time do you have  ?  
Ah  ,   twenty four years old  .   And you  ?  
But  ,   am  ,   For how long have you been taking calls  ,   or is this the first time that you're taking a call in  ,   in the Fisher study  ?  
What nationality are you  ?    What nationality  ?  
What  what happened  ?  
You have one  ?  
Mm  .   But  ,   What  ?  um  ,   when I was in high school  ,   my best friend was  ,   was Puerto Rican  .  
yes  .   From  ,   um  ,   From where  ?   From Carolina  ,   I believe it was  .  
yes  ,   um  ,   What do you  ,   what do you do  ?  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
Where  ?  
No  ?  
After Well  ,   and  ,   and  ,   did they do it to you  ,   or you did it yourself  ?  
And do you have  ,   have earrings  ?  
What was it  ?    No  ,   because they almost don't see it  .  
No  ,   no  ,   I'm not like the people who  ,   how do you say  ?    Ah  ,   em
They get the little rings  .    But  ,   um  ,   ah  ,   that  ,   ah  ,   OK and  ,   um  ,   you said that you're twenty two  .    Right  ?  
What  ?  
that you said you are twenty two years old  ,   correct  ?  
Okay  ,   am  ,   And you  ,   am  ,   are you in school  ,   or  ,   also  ,   or  ?  
How much did they pay you for the survey  ?  
Pardon me  ?  
How much  .    .    .  for the survey  ,   for the first one  ?  
Can you give me a second  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Oh  .   The  ,   the  ,   How  ?   Ah  ,   I want to ask you  .  
No  ,   that you said  ,   how you were taking a bath  ,   on the phone  ?  
Oh  .   Okay  .   Okay  ,   And  ,   um  ,   What else was it  ?   I was going to ask you  ,   and  ,   I'm thinking  .   And you were born in Puerto Rico  ,   or were you born here in the United State  ?  
what  ,   oh you've never gone to Puerto Rico  ?  
Is he Colombian also  ?  
What  ?   No  .   He's American  .  
In what  ,   in what do you work over there in Washington  ?  
In the Navy  ?   Ah  ,   my cousin is in that  .  
From where  ,   from Iraq  ?  
Oh  ,   They sent him to New Orleans  ?   Where is he  ?  
Oh  ,   I see  .   And  ,   and  ,   and where is he stationed  ,   in what  ,   in what state  ?  
In what state  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿yes  ?    ,   the family  ,   our family  ,   my mom's and his  ,   they're all in Philadelphia
Eh  ,   my name is Annie  .   And  ,   My name is Annie and I live in Miami and I'm also Puerto Rican  .   Hello  ?  
The word to discuss they said was marriage  .   So what do you think of marriage  ?  
How many years have you been married  ?  
And are you married  ?  
what  ?  
At what age did you get married  ?    How old  ,   how do you think that you were able to endure these thirteen years  ?  
Um  ,   again  ,   please  ?  
Oh  ,   you're both religious  ?  
Also this  .   So  ,   has this been your only couple then  ?   Has this been your only marriage  ?  
Wow wow  .    And how old are your kids  ?  
my Latin friends that I also know that their marriage is still a little bit harder  .   Because the husband doesn't necessarily eh help or you know  ?  
Good  ,   uh  ,   good afternoon  ,   uh  ,   ¿who do i have the pleasure to talk to  ?  
Silvia  ,   ¿How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   thanks  ,   ¿where do you live  ?  
Yes  ,   ¿where are you calling from  ?  
¿How's the weather over there  ?  
Yes  ,   little by little  ,   how's everything  ?  
So  ,   my Spanish is not  ,   well  ,   it is as good as should be  ,   right  ?  
No  ,   I don´t think that´s correct  ,   I don´t think so because Why  ?   because they will not look for it in several languages  .  
In what  ?    ,   Which languages  ?  
by the  ,   the  ,   the  ,   how do you say it  ?   so then what was it  ,   marriages  ,   right  ?  
and what do you want to talk about marriage  ,   Are you married  ?  
yes  ,   And you  ?  
And where do you live  ?  
It's not the same way right  ?    ,   they don't treat you
And you have to put up with the  ,   the reasons for people and that's harder  ,   staying together  ,   uh  ,   as boyfriends  ,   you know  ,   because you can get out whenever you want to  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   because there's no  ,   nothing's legal
Right  ,   because it's more  ,   it's harder to stay together because that way  ,   so you love each other more  ,   because there's nothing to  ,   you don't have to be there  ,   ¿right  ?  
or I went out for lunch  ,   right  ?  
when you are already married  .   You have to do some things  ,   because there is  ,   how you call it  ?    ,   there is more work to do in the house  ,   you know  ,   because of the marriage  ,   to maintain the marriage
Ah How are you  ?   Where are you  ?   I'm in Philadelphia  .  
yes  ,   Have you been living in Nebraska a long time  ?  
How is it over there  ,   very cold in winter  ?  
Ah  ,   okay  ,   And what state is nearby  ?  
Are you going to receive people from there in your state  ?  
Where  ?    Ah yes
And after  ,   I don't know if they will give them a house or what  ?    A different accommodation  .    No  ?  
the beach  ,   it has beach  .   Are you having dinner  ?  
aha  ,   what  ?  
Were you eating  ?  
aha Oh yes  ,   and have a lot of people from this program called you  ?  
what  ?  
Have a lot of people from this program from the university called you  ?   of the language of this that we are talking  .  
Did you put all the hours  ,   or just at night  ?  
Really  ?    ,   I sometimes ask  ,   to reach the 25 calls
oh  ,   in English  ,   you can  ?  
And you are married  ,   right  ?  
But you have a lot of practice with Spanish  ,   do you speak a lot of Spanish  ?  
Is you husband American  ?  
And you are originally  ,   Where is your family from  ?  
what  ?  
You guys  ,   do you watch the soaps  ,   the programs in English or in Spanish  ?  
aha me too  ,   did you see the stepmother  ?  
oh  ,   it already came  ,   yes I have it here  ,   and you not seeing it there  ?  
Hello  ?  
yes  ,   look  ,   and what country are you from  ?  
No  .   because I think that they try to make it how do you say it  ?   general
yes  ,   but I say  ,   how  ,   how do they find people out of the area  ?  
yes  ,   how many years have you been married  ?  
how curious  ,   right  ?    I was talking yesterday with a man who was also from Connecticut who told me that he'd been married twice  ,   but it was all that when he got married that
it's different  ,   you can be  ,   how do you say  ?    Eh  ,   it's not the same living together than being sep  living alo  you in your house and me in mine  .  
You know  ?    When you were separated well
Aha  .   And  ,   and Why did you get divorced  ?   Because it went eh  ,   your marriage went bad or  ?  
Ah  ,   how many kids do you have  ?  
yes  ,   look  ,   where do you live in Connecticut  ?  
Like by where  ?   I  ,   I know a little bit of Connecticut  .  
Ah  .   And  ,   and  ,   you go to New York to work  ?  
Ah  ?  
Do you guys go to New York to work  ?  
Aha  ,   And  ,   and  ,   have a lot of interesting stories about the clients you have in the limousine  ?  
Always happens  ,   yes  .   And  ,   how many kids do you have  ?  
And  ,   do you maintain a good relationship after the divorce with the father  ?  
yes  ,   and wasn't it really difficult raising five kids  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   and have you felt that it's more difficult to raise kids correctly here than in Puerto Rico  ?  
And the kids confuse them  ,   you know  ?    They don't know
So  ,   your grandchild hits your daughter  ?  
They  ,   they treat  ,   well  ,   I wouldn't let that mine as soon as I see that he's not acting well  ,   mine  ,   and I would say let him be a womanizer  ,   but he wasn't  ,   how do you say  ?  
Such a shame  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   so sad  ,   right  ?  
Can you hear me  ?  
Hello  ?  
Can you hear me  ?   I'm Joe  ,   What's your name  ?  
Where are you from Jose  ?  
From Philadelphia  ?  
yes  ,   And you  ?  
I'm from Colorado  ,   What nationality are you  ?  
And how is Guatemala  ,   is it nice over there  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  ?  
That too  ,   that too  ,   And where are you from  ?  
American schools  ,   american universities  ,   you start working here  ,   you  ,   you are no longer from Guatemala  ,   for instance  ,   right  ?  
But when I  ,   for instance  ,   go back to Guatemala  ,   I feel like it is not  ,   seriously  ,   it is not my country  ,   really  ,   I don't know  .   Because I have spent so much time here in the United States  ,   right  ?  
No  ,   ex exactly  ,   no  ,   no  .    And you  ,   you've been to Philadelphia before  ?  
i work with a salesman at my company that's located in Tennessee  ,   that's his area  ,   and his territory covers Tennessee  ,   Arkansas  ,   Louisiana and  ,   ¿what was the other  ?    ,   Mississippi
That's what she thought  ,   yea  ,   uh  ,   interesting  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   that she never  ,   she had never seen that
Yeah  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   but it's a  ,   it's a very beautiful state  ,   it has a lot  ,   it's less industrialized than other coun   ,   than other states
With  ,   with lot's of like gangs or  ,   uh  ,   it's more healthier  ,   ¿right  ?  
What are you studying  ?  
Ah yes  ,   that's great  ,   do you really like it  ,   do you want to work on that  ?  
hello  ,   what  ?  
hello  ,   I'm  ,   fine  ,   and you  ?  
ah  ,   how are you  ?   we spoke the other day  ?  
how are you  ?   how are you  ?  
son  ,   ah  ?   fine  ,   here a bit tired  ,   I was painting my house
ah  ,   can you give me a second  ?  
okay  ,   yes oh okay  ,   no problem then  ,   what's new  ?  
how come  ?  
oh  ,   another tattoo  ?   oh okay
of what  ?  
so  ,   what did they tell us  ?    That today we have to talk again about the same or
and how many calls can you make in a day  ,   on e one or two  ?  
and listen  ,   you could do it twice  ?  
so that  ,   and your daughter  ,   where is she  ?  
how do you say  ?    Ah  ,   that you can talk you can see the person so he started to say hello  ,   I'm at home
oh  ,   that's the  ,   the speakerphone  ?  
I don't go to the door  ,   instead I say  ,   what do you want  ?  
fight about what  ?  
hmm  ,   but only fists or what  ?  
aye  ,   all three  ?  
Oh my god  ,   ¿why  ,   fighting over what  ?  
Um  ,   oh no  ,   it's not like before  ,   that you hit each other and  ,   well  ,   the fight is over  ,   and you go on  ,   ¿right  ?  
Uh  ,   no  ,   it's not good  ,   it's true  ,   there are  ,   ¿and what do you say  ,   will you never go to your country  ?  
¿don't you want to see it at all  ?  
what  ?  
mm  ,   and do you guys have a big house here  ?  
how big is the house  ?  
how many bedrooms do you have  ?  
you you  ?  
your husband what does he do  your husband  ?  
he was a steelworker Did he told me  ?  
And what else is there to do around here   ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Ay  ,   how are you  ?  
Also  .    And you  ?  
Fine  ,   thanks  .    Where are you  ?  
Have you received many calls with the program plan  ?  
Ah  ,   darn  .   Well  ,   move forward and that everything's good  ,   no  ?  
Ah  .    What's the weather like there  ,   a lot of rain  ?  
and do you live alone  ,   are you with your family  ?  
You only have one son  ,   also  ?  
Ah  .   And have you been Virginia many years or  ?  
For the school  ,   really  ?  
Did you move a long time ago or before  ?  
And now  .    Huh  ?  
Really  ?  
I tell you  ,   I wouldn't go if a lot of time hadn't passed  ,   no  ?  
even if it's close  ,   no  ?    It affected me a lot  .    And now I'm affected by that of New Orleans
so many things  ,   right  ?    Even if you don't hear much here about the hurricane  .  
In this country yes  ,   right  ?  
The red cross  ,   right  ?  
Hmm  .    What will they do with this  .    Happened after what they tried is for people and great  ,   or they stay where they are  ?    Because this will be a good time to go to
ah ah ah  ,   true  .    I think that those who are most used to it to will want to come back  ,   right  ?  
That I wouldn't know how it is because if the house is in a dry and peaceful place right  ?   that's fine I understand if they remove them  .  
oh God  ,   what a tragedy  .   They say is the worst tragedy that has occurred  ,   right  ?  
this two those year they're smart they're open still ever since the first day  ,   it seems  ,   right  ?  
I don't know if the church or what  ,   what happened  ?  
Aye  ,   what dog do you have  ?  
Is he big or little  ?  
How big is he  ,   a french poodle  ?  
Like a Shepherd  ?  
And so is he really sweet  ?  
Ah  ,   okay  .    How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Ah  ,   how many kids do you have  ?  
What age  ?  
Ah  ,   a kid's clown  ?  
Yes  .    Ah  ,   you work in this  ?  
Ah  ,   you're a teacher  ?  
How many kids do you have  ?  
So then I have family in Manhattan  .   Have you always lived in Georgia  ?  
What country are you from  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  .   ¿And where are you from  ?  
Yes  ,   ¿is this the first call you make  ?  
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   it's true  ,   in fact he has  ,   ¿and do you work or stay at home  ?  
Ah  ,   how nice  .   And what does he work in  ?  
Uh uh  .   oh  .   And do you like Georgia  ?  
And you  ?   Uh uh  .  
Ah  ,   oh  .   okay  .   Because I suppose it's economically better than Peru  ,   right  ?  
But  ,   let see what else  .   We have to talk like ten minutes  ,   right  ?   I'm looking at this of nine eleven  .  
Ah  ,   and you  ,   what  ,   were you there  ?  
I see  ,   anyway  .   What else do you do  ?  
What else  ?   Do you have lots of friends in Georgia  ?  
What church do you belong to  ?  
Oh  ,   okay  ,   Krishna  ?  
Oh  ,   aren't those the ones that have a braid  ?  
Uh  ?  
oh  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   okay  .   And your kids dress like that also  ?  
No  ?   oh  ,   not yet  .  
Uh uh  ,   oh  ,   and how did you get into it  ?   When you came to Georgia or do you have that in Peru  ?  
Oh  ,   that's good Then you are thin  ,   right  ?  
Wow  ,   Then all the calls you've made you can talk about anything  ?  
¿Are you separated or are you there  ?  
how are you  ?   Nice to meet you
Josefina  ,   How are you  ?   Where are you  ,   far  ?  
so we are in the  ,   the same side but you are in the area of the tropic how are you  ?   have you been getting calls for a long time  ?  
ah okay perfect  ,   and what do you think of it well you've only talked with one other person only Right  ?  
yes And you  ?  
we are starting  ,   yes em well the two people I spoke with were very pleasant  ,   and do you study or are you working  ?  
It's a very old man  ,   uh  ,   that  ,   ¿what did you her the subject was  ?    ,   because i think it was something about religion  ,   ¿right  ?  
or  ,   yeah  ,   i think so  ,   i think that a person's religion is very different from another  ,   they don't unite at all  ,   ¿right  ?  
Or get along better because of it  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   i think that inside  ,   even inside a religion there's a lot of people that sees it one way and another people sees it differently
and things like that  ,   like a religion from far away  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   like that one  ,   the islam  ,   or well  ,   although there is a lot of people here in the United States now  ,   ¿right  ?  
of other religion  ?   or of the Christians themselves  ?  
different churches or schools for example there the Pentecostal who have a different practice to  ,   what could it be  ?   to the Baptist  ,   or the Catholic right  ?   also are  ,   and there are those who say no  ,   I'm Christian and one tells them me too they say  ,   no you are not Christian
you believe in the saints for example  ,   the Jehovah witnesses have a lot of differences in their practice right  ?   I think that religion is something to not even talk about because it gets in
brings problems right  ?   for example at work one starts talking about that and well  ,   one gets into um problems
They say the same but interpret it differently  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   for example  ,   sometimes  ,   um
Now  ,   yes  ,   in general terms i do like to listen  ,   uh  ,   for example  ,   there are a lot  ,   there is a channel of only religious talk from different parts  ,   ¿right  ?  
well  ,   from different churches  ,   and  ,   uh  ,   i listen to that and i get relaxed  ,   it makes me very easy because it's like they're all talking about things  ,   well  ,   that i understand  ,   ¿right  ?  
and well  ,   i take it as some people that want to do some good for others and i think that's good  ,   but there might be someone that hears something like that and says "what a mess  ,   ¿what are they saying  ?    ,   it's not like that"  ,   and what not
Uh  ,   um  ,   it also depends on how you want to see it  ,   ¿right  ?  
exactly  ,   exactly  ,   ¿and have you been living there in Miami for long  ?  
and did you studied a career  ?  
I have realize that it helps  ,   I mean  ,   it's nice to help people  ,   right  ?    ,   an the teacher  ,   imagine  ,   how many kids you can guide for the rest of the life  ,   right  ?  
and from which grade you started  ?  
Oh  ,   that's wonderful  ,   you sound like a 23  ,  21  ,  22 year old  ,   and you are  ?    ,   if you have worked then no
together  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   but if they're going to be  ,   they're going to be of close age  ,   ¿right  ?  
Oh  ,   that's so nice  ,   god  ,   god bless you  ,   so they're going to be like that  ,   of very close age  ,   ¿right  ?  
That's very good  ,   so they can be little partners  ,   i had only one son and he feels lonely and i imagine that  ,   well it's always good to have more than one  ,   ¿right  ?  
How are you  ?   Here's Norma from Atlanta Georgia  .  
ah  ,   okay  ,   And what opinion do you have regarding what they just said  ,   of religions  ?  
Okay  ,   What was  ,   what was your topic  ?  
ah  ,   it was  ,   if the religions unify  ,   no  .   What opinions do you have of the Christian or Muslim religions  ?  
Ah  ,   That's why they called you  ?  
How old are you  ?  
yes  ,   what do you do for work  ?  
What do you do for work  ?  
You do tattoos  ?  
Do you have some  ?  
Ah  ,   they say  ,   they said that  ,   What do you think  ,   for example  ,   about the problem of homosexuality  ?  
No  ,   to you  ?  
¿And does it bother you  ?  
No  ,   i  ,   i mean  ,   it's  ,   it's a  ,   a  ,   it is against religion  ,   it is against god's commandments  ,   but i mean  ,   each one  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   does their life  ,   you know if
Oh  ,   ¿yes  ?    ,   oh  ,   i didn't know that
Yes  ,   ¿would you do that  ?  
If we are were Pentecostal  ,   all of us  .   What are you  ?   what religion  ?  
What  ?  
no  ,   how is it in English  ?  
Ari what  ?  
Have you ever seen them  ?  
hmm  .    You never read about  ,   well  ,   I suppose that you've read the Bible once  ,   or no  ?   No
Never  ,   not even when you were younger  ?  
Right  ?    ,   every one  ,   nobody forces you to be religious  ,   to belong to a political party or different groups  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   that's in your heart  ,   if you want to
And you  ,   that you go to  ,   you go to church every sunday  ,   ¿right  ?  
And do you  ,   ¿do you wear a uniform or something  ?  
¿Do you use like a special uniform or something  ?  
Right  ?    ,   and the men use  ,   it's called a sort of  ,   it's called "doti"  ,   with like a shirt called curta
other than  ,   ¿you only eat what  ?  
yes here they don't do that  ,   but I  ,   And they do it over there  ?  
Hi good evening  ,   Who do I have the pleasure of speaking with  ?  
How is it going  ?   yes that's what it seemed like right
how weird  ,   I don't know  ,   have you talked to other people or not  ?  
¿And you  ?  
aha  ,   aha  ,   and from what countries and religions are your parents  ?  
and is it to raise  ,   well for instance  ,   with other people that have raised in such homes  ?   of a father  ,   of parents being one Christian and the other Jewish
eh let's say in situations in which people practise more their religion  ,   how do people feel being raised in such a home  ?  
And and what do you think of the question if the diversity of religions creates divisions between people or  ,   or brings them together  ?  
eh do you have kids or  ?  
ah yes yes I have two kids one is seven and the other is three and you  ?  
what religion and nationality are you  ?  
aha and what country are you from  ?  
aha and what do you think about the religions that say that  .    .    .    ?  
They are like fanatics  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   they're
so  ,   they  ,   yes  ,   they are very  ,   like they use their religion for violence  ,   it seems  ,   ¿right  ?  
Ohh  ,   have you been  ?  
Why do you shave your head  ?  
especially if you live in a temple right  ?  
Why did you get into that religion  ?  may be your husband or someone you knew
and Why do you eat Meat  ?  
you don't eat  ,   you don't eat milk and yogurt  ?  
and I  ,   well what can you do  ?   right  ?   every soul is spiritual and has free will  ,   you can't force a kid or a person
you can't oblige the person or he'll become frustrated  ,   rebel  ,   right  ?   and renounce his believe or the  ,   the way of life he is having  ,   I mean  ,   it's something natural  ,   it comes from the heart
Um  ,   how many kids do you have  ?  
And where are you living  ?  
That's why And you  ?  
what music do they dance to in your country  ?   what is it called what you dance  ?  
yes  ,   what's good here  ?   The drug ballads are good  .  
And does Reggaeaton bore you or not  ?  
really  ?   Hm mm
Well  ,   yes  ,   like you can't dedicate songs  ,   ¿right  ?  
Quiet  ,   right  ?  
Now you're living in Puerto Rico or San Juan or where  ?  
Sorry  ?  
Where are you living now  ?  
but in what part  ?  
Oh yeah  ?  
They play it there  ?   Because I sometimes see it  ,   but it's always pure hip hip That's why it is that
What are you studying over there  ?  
Yes  ,   that would be good  ,   something like that  .   Send  ?  
Are you studying in Philadelphia  ?  
Ah  ,   i didn´t hear  ,   what  ,   sorry  ?  
Ar you studying in Philadelphia or do you live there permanently  ?  
And which clubs do they have for Hispanic there  ,   Nothing  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?   Hello  ?   Hi  ,   yes  ,   who's speaking  ?  
Aha  .   With Junior  .   Who's speaking  ?  
What is  ,   what's your name  ?  
Junior  ?  
Hello  ,   I'm Nicole  .   Where are you  ?   Nicole  .  
What  ?   Nicole  .   Aha  .   How are you  ?  
Ha  ,   ha  ,   Very good  .   And you  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Where are you  ?  
Eh  ,   my  ,   you don't understand my Spanish  ,   or Spanish in general  ?  
Ah  ,   okay Um  ,   well  ,   I'll try to talk slower then Um  ,   where are you from  ?  
New York  ,   and you  ?  
And you  ?  
ah  ,   from New York  .   What part  ?  
How old are you  ?  
And what do you do here  ?  
Ah  ,   what do I do here  ?  
yes  .   And you  ?   What do you do  ?  
yes  .   What do you do  ?  
Teacher  ?  
Oh  ,   What grade  ?  
Oh  ,   okay  .   Oh  ,   okay And what country are you from  ?  
And did you were born here  ?  
I was born here in New York  .   Are you single  ?   Married  ?  
What  ?  
And what do you do to have fun  ?  
What type of music do you like  ?  
Was it easy  ?    Latin music or music  ?  
Do you have a kid or not  ?  
Sorry  ?  
And you  ,   eh  ,   are you married  ?  
Aha  .    And this must be a lot of work  ,   no  ?  
yes  ,   it's a lot of work for me  ,   how do you say  ?    I  ,   I have fun with her  .  
It's hard when  ,   yes it's hard when she asked me  ,   today  ,   mommy  ?    I say  ,   oh  ,   yes  ,   at grandma's house  ,   in the house of her mom  .  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
yes  .   yes  ,   and do you dance  ?  
What did you say  ?  
yes  ,   how you call it  ?   I was at a concert like two or three days ago
Huh  ?  
And how was the concert  ?  
Yeah  ,   it was but  ,   how do you say  ?    The other boys  ,   they are from  ,   they're the bachata is pretty big there  .  
Well you know English perfectly  .    Do you speak  ,   do you know English well  ?  
hum  ,   sorry  ?  
yes  ,   and you  ,   do you spend many time on the computer  ,   or not  ?  
Oh  ,   and what do you use  ?    ,   AOL and that  ?  
Excuse me  ?  
Which internet are you using  ?  
What am I using  ?  
Which internet  ?  
yes  ,   so you see who they are  ,   listen  ,   right  ?  
yes  .   do they also have the songs by internet or no  ?  
And how are you  ?   Like How do you look  ?   How do you look  ?  
How  ?   How  ,   how am I  .   I'm white I have dark hair  .   I'm average height  .   Eh  .   I don't know that's how I am  .  
What school are you in  ?   I'm going to go learn over there  .  
In what school  ?  
How fun  ,   and what do you do now  ?   I mean  ,   are you studying and working at the same time  ?   or  ?  
And you like it like that  ?   I mean  ,   online  ?  
What was that  ?  
But it's  ,   how do you say  ?    Yes  ,   I'm here because she's always with them  .  
Eh  ,   good afternoon  ,   who do I have the pleasure of talking to  ?  
Oh  ,   how are you  ?  
Very cold there or very hot  ?  
Look  ,   what's today topic  ?  
really  ?   I don't know  .  
You speak or I speak  ?  
Well  ,   you speak  .    What  ,   what country are you from  ,   Carmen  ?  
And you  ?  
Okay  .    What do you think about marriage  ?  
Aha  .    Why  ?  
Aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   How long have you been married  ?  
Oh  ,   but you were  ?  
Ah  .   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   it's true  .   Very true what you are saying  .   And where did you meet your husband  ?  
Oh  .   You are like  ,   like he's sharing the apartment  ,   the room  ,   the apartment with you or what  ?  
Eh  ?  
Oh  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   okay  .   But are they good kids  ?  
Look  ,   then ah mm  .   Oh  ,   and do you have kids  ?  
Oh  ,   women and men  ?  
yes  ,   that gives one so much  ,   so much happiness  ,   right  ?  
And he says  ,   "And from this where did it come out  ?  " And it's that
And you know something  ?   They never learn their lesson
Aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   no  ,   they say  ,   how is it  ?    they never know what they have until they lose it  .  
Aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  .    But if it keeps being the same  ?  
Because there's a saying that says that the woman makes the man  ,   no  ?  
eh  ,   How are you  ?  
fine And you  ?  
Bessy  ,   from  ,   from Where are you from  ?  
And you  ?  
aha ah  ,   so and Well  ,   from Salvador  ,   How do you listen to music over there  ?  
Okay And you  ?  
In Spanish really  ?  
Okay and in English do you like any music in English  ?  
mm yes What other type of music do you like  ?  
of the  ,   what is it  ?   Indians from India
aha  ,   they should be this  ,   ah  ,   what's it called  ?    Not be discussing  .  
and  ,   and who play it  ?    The Hi  Hispanics
Hello  ?  
Yes  ,   Hello  ?  
Ah  ,   my name's Alex  ,   eh  ,   I'm here in Los Angeles  .    And you  ?  
In Seattle  ?  
Where are you from  ?  
I'm from Panama  .    And you  ?  
Ah  ,   okay  .    Yes  ,   I've been here for what  ?   fifteen years  .  
Well  .    And what do you think about music today  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  .    The old ballads  ?  
It's not the same  .    No  ?  
Aha  .    Who has these songs  ?  
yes  ,   yes and also another Venezuelan  .    What's his name  ?    The Puma  .  
Well  ,   music identifies with life  ,   you know  ?  
how old are you  ?  
how much  ?  
Do you remember Soda Stereo  ?  
What  ?  
Merengue must be quite popular in Panama  ,   isn't it  ?  
But merengue existed twenty or thirty years ago  ?  
Hello  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   fine  ,   and you  ?  
Fine  ,   and where are you calling from  ?  
Do you go a lot to the clubs and dance and that  ?  
yes  .    It's true  .    But  ,   do you listen to Latin music or  ,   American music or what  ?  
no  ,   eh  ,   I don't know why  .    And you  ?  
and and  ,   what else  ?   I forgot what I was going to say  ,   but  ,   but we do listen to music a lot
and who knows  ?   Maybe the genes you know  ,   the  ,   maybe your daughter is going to be a musician
because I  ,   outside of the car  ,   the only thing I hear is you know and I can hear nothing else  ,   so what are they hearing  ?  
Just that  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
Hi  ,   ¿who am i talking to  ?  
Junio  ,   ¿who's this  ?  
Nicole  ,   ¿did we talk yesterday or not  ?  
Yes  ,   the same  ,   ¿how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Fine  ,   fine  ,   well  ,   this time  ,   uh  ,   ¿did you listen to the music recording or not  ?  
Well  ,   i don't know what else to say about the music  ,   ¿what else are we going to say about music  ?  
¿What kind of music do you like  ?  
Yeah  ,   ¿which one  ?  
¿Do you like Bon Jovi  ?  
And what other type of music do you like  ?  
Classic  ,   no way  ?  
but I like music  ,   do you like country music or not  ?  
You don't like country  ?   Me neither but some songs I like because my sisters like those people like Tim McGraw and those people  .  
like  ,   you don't know  ?  
You don't like fifty cents  ?  
You don't know  ?  
I don't know ah yes  ,   fifty cents has a song of candy shop or no  ?  
And  ,   ¿do you like to dance or  ?  
¿Huh  ?  
¿not much  ?    ,   ¿do you like to dance  ?  
¿But do you dance that  ?  
¿which  ?    ,   i mean  ,   i think that things  .    .    .   it's just that when i listen to music at home i kinda like to listen to the lyrics
And do you dance it  ?  
Do you dance  ?  
But do you dance  ,   do you dance  ?  
How  ?  
Mm  .   In  .   Yes  ,   the music  .   The  ,   do you play any instruments or something  ?  
Uh huh  .   And ¿did you like the gym at high school or not  ?  
¿what  ?  
Ah what  ?  
Good afternoon  ,   ¿who am i talking to  ?  
¿Oh ye  ?  
Oh  ,   well  ,   look at that  ,   the same with me  ,   uh  ,   through my daughter  ,   ¿and what does your son study  ?  
Oh  ,   ok  ,   in War  ,   ¿what's it called  ?    ,   War Coco
¿Your daughter  ?  
yes  ,   quite hard  ,   it has been deemed  ,   it has been deemed as hard and where are you from  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   oh well  ,   now  ,   we have to speak about music  .   Cuban people are quite good at it  ,   isn't it  ?  
And all these kind of songs and now that I am am a grown up I like to dance well all the retired and all  .   And what about you  ?  
ah The it truly comes from there  ?  
yes  ,   I also have this  ,   this knowledge  ,   so I think that yes  ,   it has a lot or relation and has a lot of feeling  .    No  ?  
how much is it  ?  
And  ,   ¿how many years ago did you get here  ?  
Oh  ,   well  ,   but well  ,   so you are  .    .    .   you have been here your whole life  ,   ¿right  ?  
aha And what part of Cuba are you from  ?  
And have you gone back there  ?  
And you all how many years has it been since you left Mexico  ?  
Ahhh  .   And what made you want to come  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   And Philadelphia  ,   why did you choose Philadelphia  ?  
And how many kids do you have  ?  
ah there in New York  ,   Right  ?  
Ah  ,   how nice  ,   how interesting And what did your daughter study  ?  
Exactly  ,   Exactly  .   And she's already  ,   And she's already married  ?  
yes  ,   And yours  ?  
coming from such a different culture  ,   right  ?  
Sure  ,   sure because University is pretty demanding like  ,   yikes  .    It complicates things right  ?    Besides  ,   well  .  
You need to be a really strong kid  ,   no  ?  
Tammy  ,   hi  ,   ¿how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   ¿and you  ?  
That's good  ,   and  ,   ¿what do you think about music  ?  
¿What kind of music do you like  ?  
¿Where are you from  ?  
¿Why  ?  
¿where does your mom live  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   i live in Seattle  ,   ¿where in Canada do you live  ?  
Yeah  ,   we've gone there  ,   suddenly we get in the car  ,   "¿where do we go  ?  "  ,   "i don't know"  ,   "¿do you have your stuff  ?  "  ,   "well  ,   let's go  ,   let's go to Canada"  ,   "ok"
Oh my God  ,   I'm surprised that this kid when he first got here  .   And the other day he was translating  ,   I told him  ,   where did all of that come from  ?    ,   and he said  ,   well  ,   just by listening to it  ,   aunty  .  
Nice  ,   oh  ,   mi husband says "what  ,   ¿are you romantic today  ?  "  ,   "no  ,   i found it"  ,   and i say  ,   i start to sing "my house" and he starts laughing
i tell him "well  ,   yeah  ,   you make me happy like that"  ,   i tell him "hey  ,   ¿don't people tell you i look younger than i am  ?    ,   it's because of the music boy"  ,   and he starts laughing
Right  ,   and ¿does he understands Spanish or  ?  
Just in spanish  .   My husband said "what if i don't know spanish  ,   how can i know what it says there  ?  "  ,   and he started reading and he translated for me and i told him "yeah  ,   you got it"  ,   he says "ok"
And  ,   ¿how old are you  ?  
¿And how long have you been in Canada  ?  
I have  ,   uh  ,   what  ?    ,   yes  ,   fifteen here too
Oh what a lady's man  ,   how much did that cost him  ?   without
That's right  .   And what city did you go to  ?   your husband  ,   for the operation  ?   In Zury  ,   that's where I live  ,   also
Oh  ,   good night  ,   I'm Norma from Georgia  ,   here in Atlanta  ,   Georgia  ,   how are you  ?  
I'm fine thank you  .   How many children do you have  ?  
Oh  ,   I have two  .   One of them is seven years old and the other one is three years old  .   And yourself  ?  
Aha  .   I talked to you  ,   right  ?  
Oh  ,   what did we talk about  ,   marriage  ?  
What type of music do you like  ?  
What happened  ?  
So eh  ,   in your  ,   in your church they play Christian music  ,   but salsa music  ,   right  ?  
music helps to relax  ,   it has a message  .   No and  ,   different types of messages  ,   there's spiritual music or even classical music  ,   isn't it  ?  
¿Oh yes  ?  
¿Do you like folkloric Peruvians music  ?  
And the music  ,   they're very nice  .   They're like very autonomous from their country  ,   they're very different  .   So  ,   i like it a lot  .   I love to hear the  ,   Peruvians music because of the  ,   like the one with flute  ,   ¿is that what they use  ?  
It is the Peruvians and who else play it  ?   There is another another nationality that sound very alike
The  ,   the  ,   oh  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   Bolivia  ,   and the Arg  the Argentinean too  ,   right  ?  
Well  ,   the Argentinean uses more the  ,   how you call it  ?   the  ,   that rope that they  ,   somehow throw  .   To the rhythm of the cable I don't know how they call it
yes  ,   it all sounds very familiar  ,   it's the Hispanic culture  ,   isn't it  ?   In South America  ,   so  ,   this  ,   Bolivia and Peru are kind of more  ,   oh  ,   similar  .  
Do you know how to play any instruments  ?  
yes  ,   music is interesting  ,   isn't it  ?   It sends cultural messages for all the people  ,   you can show off your culture  ,   the culture of every place  ,   every country  .  
yes  ,   to bring in more people  ,   right  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Where are you  ?  
In what part of Nebraska  ?   I was once in Omaha  ,   like
Oh  ,   and did you like it  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  .   Aha  .   And where do you live now  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  ?  
From where  ?  
And  ,   ¿what music do you like to listen to  ?  
¿And what singers do you like  ?  
Right  ,   um  ,   ¿and you  ?  
And  ,   ¿do you know who Mecano is  ?    ,   You remember Mecano  ,   ¿don't you  ?  
¿Vile  ?  
And  ,   i don't know  ,   ¿do you think that the music has a lot to do with your life  ?  
And there in Nebraska  ,   ¿can you find a place to dance norteña music  ?  
really  ?  
And does your husband like to dance  ?  
¿You don't know what bachata is  ?  
You are from the Dominican Republic  ,   right  ?  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
Um  .   How strange right  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
Yes  ,   ¿who am i talking to  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿where are you at  ,   Mercedes  ?  
Um  ,   I'm talking from Pennsylvania  ,   ¿and you  ?  
¿Where in Pennsylvania are you  ?  
And you  ?  
Nice to meet you  ,   ¿what country are you from  ?  
Oh  ,   and where are you from  ?  
And how many calls have you done so far  ?  
¿And where does Merengue come from  ,   which part of the Caribbean did it start on  ?  
¿The what  ?  
Merengue  ,   i know it's Caribbean  ,   but ¿where is it from  ?    ,   more specifically
In let's say  ,   in Cuba what would she be considered  ?  
Mm  .   Look  ,   and how long have you already been here in the United States  ?  
And how long have you been here  ?  
Uh huh  ,   and  ,   ¿what kind of music do you like here  ?    ,   i think the one here  ,   well
Or  ,   in spanish  ,   ¿do you like music in English better or in spanish  ?    ,   ¿do you listen to a lot of music in spanish  ?  
¿And do you listen to it on CD or do you go to the opera to listen to it  ?  
Maybe like more  ,   uh  ,   commercial  ,   right  ?  
The other one also seems like he's had a little opera is that Josh Groban  ,   ¿have you heard him  ?  
And ¿did you like it  ?  
Quite  ,   yes  ,   uh  ,   ¿which was it the one i went to see  ?    ,   oh  ,   i don't remember  .   Of course it's in Italy  ,   i was in Italy  ,   but it's about two
Hello very good and you  ?   how nice Laya I'm Michael
how are you  ?  
ah well and what do you think  ?  
eh you already went to Brazil or not  ?  
what  ?  
you went to Brazil already  ?  
what part of Brazil are you from  ?  
a few years and  ,   where are you calling from  ?  
And  ,   ¿do you play any instruments  ?  
Yeah  ,   a little  ,   i want to learn piano but it's very hard  ,   ¿do you play something  ?  
¿What  ?  
uh  ,   do you go to music concerts regularly  ?  
from a band that's called [  .    .    .  ] do you know it  ?  
you don't like it  ,   then  ?  
But to me  ,   well  ,   to me  ,   it seems to be very repetitive music also  ,   and if you don't really understand the words  ,   you know  ?   I suppose that you also lose a lot
that must have been very hard right  ?  
because in all the cities there were demonstrations right  ?  
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   it was  ,   i don't know  ,   a very strong global reaction ¿right  ?    ,   because  ,   well  ,   it was really
Nothing like that had ever happened before  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   and besides  ,   all the attempts of political manipulation there were and
And they went out to protest too  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   so
well  ,   it was a complicated moment  ,   but within the tragedy  ,   it was  ,   i don't know  ,   you realize that people can really do something ¿right  ?  
because i heard that the people was a little bit disappointed  ,   ¿right  ?  
hmm hmm yeah oh well it's a pity  ,   no  ?    Because it seems like people were disillusioned and
oh  ,   which one is it  ,   the last one  ?  
and comes  ,   comes  ,   what's her name  ?    ,   ah
what university  ?   Penn  ?  
dou you study in Upenn  ?   I  ,  
so we are now going to talk  ,   okay  ?   we got
it's kind of weird  ,   this is your first call then  ?  
well  ,   what do you do  ?  
well  ,   how  ?  
so  ,   uh  ,   i got out with the master  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   not that it makes much of a difference but
Uh huh  ,   uh huh  ,   ¿and don't you want to go back to Brasil  ?  
Hi  ,   ¿how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   ¿and you  ?  
Very well  ,   Annie  ,   I'm in Texas  ,   ¿where are you  ?  
How did you find out  ?  
You too  ,   uh  ,   yeah  ,   i found out like that  ,   ¿where in Texas  ?  
But my What  ?  
Many  ,   many of the people are just walking by there because they have nothing to do  .   so then what music do you like  ?  
yes is true  ,   were you born in the United States  ?  
Uh  ,   i was gonna ask you because you sounded Puerto Rican  ,   and  ,   ¿How long have you been in Miami  ?  
Uh huh  ,   ¿and you  ?    ,   no  ,   only i moved to go to college
¿And where in Puerto Rico are you from  ?  
¿And you  ?  
¿And do you like it  ?  
And where did you study  ?  
Then  ,   who are your favorite singers  ?  
eh I like Marc Anthonly  ,   eh I like Alejandro Sanz quite a lot  .   And you  ?  
oh  ,   what's the name  ?   Northern music  ,   northern music  .  
and what do you think about regeatton  ?  
Yeah  ,   that's why  ,   ¿right  ?  
Oh yeah  ?    ,   i didn't know that
In spanish  ?    ,   you don't say  .  
still  ?    ,   damn  ,   i thought that Elvis Crespo already  .    .    .  
And then what else did we have to talk about  ,   oh  ,   What is the role that music plays in your life  ?  
But if I clean  ,   and sometimes when i study  ,   I play music  .   But most of the times only when I need to relax  ,   right  ?    ,   when I am doing something that I can't do watching TV  ,   then I listen to music
But I know people who do so  ,   and with the  ,   what's its name  ?   MP3  ,   that'0s it  ,   MP3
Which one  ?  
Can you remember the title of some song  ?  
And you like it there  ?  
¿Hi  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
¿Hi  ?  
¿Hi  ?  
Hi  ,   ¿how are you  ?  
¿How are you  ?  
Very good  ,   ¿and you  ?  
¿What's your name  ?  
Maria  ,   ¿and you  ?  
Well  ,   nothing  .   ¿how long have you been doing this  .    .    .   this  .    .    .    ?  
Oh  ,   ¿it's the first time  ?    ,   oh  ,   Me too
Oh  ,   ¿yes  ?    ,   oh  ,   OK
Ye  ,   yes  ,   where  ,   ¿where are you  ?  
In Florida  ?  
In Fl  ,   ¿where  ?    ,   ¿in Philadelphia  ?  
Yeah  ,   ¿and you  ?  
Yes  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   we have to talk about marriage  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   or
I unders   ,   yeah  ,   because it said marriage at the beginning  ,   but then it said  ,   ¿what music do you like and does music play an important role in your life  ?  
Uh  ,   lets see  ,   ¿where are you from  ?  
I'm from Madrid  ,   Spain  ,   ¿and you  ?  
Yeah  ,   ¿how did you know  ?  
Well  ,   uh  ,   a classmate of mine that's in the linguistics department at Penn  ,   at Penn  ,   at the University of Pennsylvania  ,   who ares the ones who are sponsoring this  ,   ¿you know  ?  
So  ,   well  ,   nothing  ,   i don't know  ,   ¿do we talk about something  ?  
And  ,   ¿how long have you been there  ?  
I don't know how much  ,   ¿do you mean the conversation  ?  
Oh  ,   ok  ,   ¿do you like it  ?  
I've been here for a year  ,   yeah  ,   i liked it  ,   but i had some trouble adapting  .   But  ,   well  ,   I'm getting used to it little by little  .   And  ,   ¿how long have you been in Florida  ?  
¿Ten years  ?    ,   oh boy
And  ,   what  ,   what  ,   ¿are you a graduate student or  ?  
You're working  ,   ¿something related to linguistics  ?  
And  ,   ¿how did you find out about this study  ?  
Oh my god  ,   ¿did you  ,   did you hear that  ?  
Yeah  ,   me neither  .   Well  ,   hey Maria  ,   so  ,   well  ,   what  ,   we have to talk about music  ,   ¿right  ?  
Ok  ,   ¿what kind of music do you like  ?  
¿Yeah  ?  
Eh  ,   what else do I like  ?   ah mm
Do you like the music more classical do you prefer pop music or  ?  
eh mm let's see  ,   and you  ?  
I like classical music  ,   I like well  ,   because I studied music  .   You know  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
And it's always  ,   well  ,   uh  ,   i was raised  ,   well  ,   like that  ,   studying and listening to classical music and opera and that  ,   ¿right  ?  
Um  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   opera and such  ,   ¿have you ever been in the opera  ?  
¿No  ?    ,   ¿No  ?    ,   or
It's expensive  ,   but you can always get a discount sometime  ,   or something  ,   ¿you know  ?  
There  ,   ¿where do you live  ?    ,   ¿where exactly in Florida do you live  ?    ,   in  ,   in
discounts and things about operas  ,   and things about  ,   ¿you know  ?  
¿Oh yes  ?  
But they're such good students that the concerts are practically  ,   i mean  ,   more than students  ,   professionals  ,   ¿you know  ?  
because they give concerts almost every day  ,   ¿you know  ?  
Do you know  ,   ¿do you know Philadelphia  ?  
What do you  ,   ¿what do you know of the United States  ?  
Yes  ,   oh  ,   Vermont  ,   ¿did you like it  ?  
In  ,   ¿what else  ?    ,   California  ,   uh
Sure  ,   where would you like to go  ?  
North Carolina  ?  
What do you want to see there  ?  
Aha  ,   oh  ,   I mean  ,   so you've been to Spain  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿yes  ?  
it was something  ,   ¿you know  ?  
is horrible  .   However in  ,   in Miami you don't have that problem  .   right  ?  
Very hot  .   And is very humid  ,   right  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
Maybe it's because  ,   because they come to  ,   they come to the United States  ,   ¿right  ?  
And  ,   ¿have you been in Barcelona  ?  
What's  ,   for the tourist  .   ¿You know  ?    ,   to visit things and watch monuments and such
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   How long were you in Spain  ?  
sure  ,   I still haven't had time  .   You know  ?  
oh  ,   really  ?  
yes  ,   there's a Japanese there's a Swedish there's a girl from Puerto Rico there's  ,   there's a Hungarian  .   Who else  ?   Eh  ,   good  ,   everything  ,   ah  ,   there's  ,   my compan 
Yes  ,   yes  ,   and what are you doing Maria  ?  
yes  ,   and in addition to that  ,   that's booming now  ,   no  ?   or that's had 
How are you  ?  
Fine  .   And you  ?  
Yesterday we talked  ?  
I think so  .   You are in Canada  ?  
Yes  ,   ¿and what are we gonna talk about now  ?    ,   ¿music  ?  
yeah  .   Yahoo  ?  
Do you have to pay  ?  
Where do you go  ?  
Only on Yahoo  ?  
or  ,   ¿how can i tell you  ?    ,   did you tell me "t a"
¿Coconut  ?    ,   uh huh
¿D  ,   H  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿are you in  ?  
Why  ?  
Ah  ,   what's so bad about it  ?  
Eh  ,   because they think that I'm American  ,   black American so when I speak Spanish even people that speak Spanish look at me and tell me  ,   where did you learn Spanish  ?  
Yeah  ,   ¿right  ?  
Dominicans there  ,   i mean  ,   you see them talking and it's just  ,   you told me yesterday  ,   ¿what kind of music did you like  ,   boleros  ?  
I imagine that the  ,   that boleros are also romantic  ,   ¿right  ?  
you are one of m y old friends so  ,   the day before yesterday I talked to him and he started to talk about that  ,   do you remember that  ?  
singer  ,   Boy George  ?  
Do you remember it  ?   Oh  ,   he's starting to sing  ,   I remembered the song about you and I and I would laugh at him
Who  ?  
When  ?  
Uh uh  ,   really  ?   Oh  .  
¿Huh  ?  
I thought that it was only like patches or is  ,   or is it the whole body  ?  
Um  ,   no  ,   like bone white  ,   it's not that white  ,   it's white  .   No  ,   white like a little dirty  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   it's  ,   i don't know  ,   but it's different
To be explaining and specially to him  ,   that everybody says things about him  ,   and explain to them that he dyed his skin  .   ¿Can you imagine you doing those  ?  
I say  ,   oh God  ,   and afterwords when they tell you that the man had two children  ,   i say  ,   oh my god  ,   i say  ,   ¿what for  ?  
¿Who did he have those children  ?  
¿With who  ?  
With a woman  ,   ¿didn't you know that  ?  
¿Really  ?  
¿It wasn't Lisa Marie  ?  
¿And that was his children  ?  
Oh  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine and you  ?  
Oh  ,   nice to meet you  .   I live here in Philadelphia  .   Where are you at  ?  
Oh  ,   just a little  ,   not that much  ,   how about you  ?  
oh  ,   have you called here before  ?  
Ah  ?  
Have you called here before  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   they've already  ,   they've already connected me with like four different people  ,   No  ?  
Aha  .   And always oh  ,   are you studying or what are you doing  ?  
Ah really  ,   Ah  ,   with  ,   And you live with the family  ?  
Ah they are  ,   And you're from Puerto Rico  ?  
And you  ?  
Really  ?  
a long time  ?  
Those cruises are very good  .   Right  ?  
Ah  ,   and they go by the Caribbean or they go farther  ?  
It's a matter of paying attention or calling  ,   ¿right  ?  
Oh my  .    ,   but at least that was it  ,   ¿right  ?  
And it's leaving fog over  ,   ¿where  ?    ,   over Carolina  ,   i think
And it's not very hot there  ?  
hot  .    And there in Miami  ,   I think that it's more  ,   more stable  ,   no  ?  
And where you live is there a cooler part or something  ?  
Since they have air conditioning everywhere  ,   no  ?  
And have you known Philadelphia  ?  
Ah Have you been in Boston  ?  
There is so cold there  ,   right  ?  
Which part of California  ?  
cold makes you tired Right  ?  
are you married  ?   are you single  ?  
yes And you  ?  
They are the greatest love one has Right  ?  
And they live there  ?  
Well like you need  ,   you need right  ?   that  ,   that
Right  ?  
Like other places  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   yes
And well  ,   wait for things not to be so hard  ,   ¿right  ?   to people  ,   there's people that has suffered a lot more
And you haven't returned to Venezuela  ?  
Eh  ,   what is it called  ,   where for the cruise  ?  
In the Huarya  ?  
been through it  ,   right  ?  
Sure  ,   right  ?  
you get tired and you don't go visit them  .   Do you travel often  ?  
Oh  ,   that's great  ,   always on holidays  ?   Can you travel  ?  
take courses or something Right  ?  
A lot of guys go there Right  ?   a lot
Aha  .   No one stable yet Right  ?  
Is all your family there  ?  
how strange you went to Miami on your own  ?  
you have your car and move around  ,   right  ?  
even clothing is somehow different  ,   isn't it  ?  
Really  ?  
And where is that at  ?  
Ah  ,   Okay  ,   okay  .   Are there casinos there  ?  
and perhaps well because of that maybe with the cars yes  ,   they don't think that that  ,   eh  ,   produces more work  .   Or more people appear to work  ,   Right  ?  
And how far is it  ?  
Hello  ?  
¿Who am i talking to  ?  
¿From where  ?  
Nice to meet you  ,   ¿do you know what's today's subject  ?  
What's  ,   uh  ,   ¿marriage  ?  
Do you start  ,   or do i  ?  
And you  ?  
You don't go out to dance  ?  
To concerts or or to nightclubs or something  ?  
Aha  ,   aha  ,   What  ,   are you young or what  ?  
And you  ?  
Do you have a family  ?  
Oh  ,   where in Puerto Rico exactly  ?  
Oh really  ?   I'm from Arecivo  .  
Have you been there for long  ?  
are you not married  ?  
Yet  ?  
Are you studying  ?  
Oh  ,   okay  ,   what are you working on  ?  
Oh  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   okay  .   Do you have a boyfriend  ?  
No  ?  
But when you had a boyfriend  ,   did you listen to music together  ?  
What music did he like  ,   the same as yours  ?  
And your mom  ?  
Does she like music also  ?  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
Is she young  ?  
She  ?   yes
Oh  ,   ok  ,   and your dad  ?  
Does he like music as well  ?  
and your friends  ?  
Do they like Hispanic music a lot  ?  
What part of Miami do you live in  ?  
Ah  ,   okay  .   and you like Chicago  ?  
Yes  ?   Is not too cold  ?  
so  ,   um  ,   what  ,   ¿what else do you like about music  ?  
Don't you like to  ,   uh  ,   ¿practice singing  ?  
¿You don't  ?  
¿Under the shower  ?  
Right  ,   ha ha  ,   and  ,   uh  ,   ¿don't you like to write it either  ?  
¿Haven't you ever written a song or something  ?  
No  ?   What are you studying  ?  
You are  ,   what were you  ,   what did you study  ?  
Oh  ,   for children or for adults  ?  
Wow Yes  ?  
Wow And  ,   and But now you are working as a psychologist no  ?  
And your friend also or what  ?  
but  ,   eh  ?  
Do you  ?  
Really  ?  
a woman  ?  
With the same person  ?  
and i  ,   i  ,   i  ,   ¿and what else can you tell me about music  ?  
Right  ,   ¿on the internet  ?  
¿And what singers do you want  ?  
Uh  ,   ¿who else  ?  
Who else  .    .    .   ¿don't you like  ,   uh  ,   Thalia  ?  
And  ,   and  ,   uh  ,   ¿don't you like Jennifer López  ?  
¿And who else  ?  
¿Luis Miguel  ?  
And  ,   ¿who's more  ?    ,   uh  ,   uh  ,   that are  ,   that are  ,   like they say  ,    trending  ,   uh  ,   and  ,   this  ,   ¿Don Omar  ?  
¿Daddy Yankee  ?  
¿Oh yes  ?  
Oh  ,   why do they have to pay her  ?  
But  ,   uh  ,   Tego Calderon came  ,   uh  ?  
Are there a lot of Latins there  ?  
Hello  ,   good afternoon  ,   who am I talking too  ?  
Josefina in Philadelphia  ,   and what's your name  ?  
me too  ,   what was your name again  ?  
and are you  ,   oh oh  ,   have you made a lot of calls  ,   have they called you a  lot as part of this program  ?  
yes oh oh oh  ,   is this your first call  ?  
aha  ,   the second  ,   when did you start  ?  
And in the end i missed it and then i said "why was i so dumb  ?  "
suddenly you thought you were going to make the calls and you didn't  ,   ¿right  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿really  ?    ,   i think it's better
that to the one who's never there and to the one who is that the computer knows  ,   right  ?  
exactly yes yes yes because at the end they want to reach people  ,   right  ?  
yes yes yes  ,   look  ,   where are you from  ?  
yes  ,   a long time ago  ,   where are you from  ?  
and have you been here for long  ?  
aha  ,   oh well I have been here for more time  ,   a bit more but you get used to it  ,   right  ?  
and you have to be  ,   have hope  ,   right  ?  
although it doesn't happen to a lot of people but you know  ,    how can you know that it's not going to happen to you  ,   right  ?  
sure  ,   that's the truth  ,   oh my God and and what do you think about cellphone  ?   I didn't really understand the questions  ,   I think it is convenient that we use them in
what type of question is that  ?  
and I really use it very little  ,   no  ?  
That they discuss things in public  ?  
but how indiscreet are people  ,   right  ?  
I'm Joe  ,   ¿what's your name  ?  
W   ,   ¿where do you live  ,   Jolie  ?  
Here in Texas  ,   ¿and you  ?  
And  ,   ¿do you have one  ?  
Exactly  ,   yes  ,   i got sixty nine dollars  ,   and my plan is ¿what  ?    ,   two hundred minutes  ,   but well  ,  
Is this the only phone that you use or do you have one at home too  ?  
Did you use it for work or just to call your friends  ?  
Two hundred and fifty minutes is so little  ,   can't you pick a five hundred minute plan or something like that  ?  
Really  ?   That much  ?  
Have you already checked other companies  ?  
And  ,   that is what they say  .   Right  ?   But later  ,   with the taxes  ,   and fees  ,  
yes  ,   yes  ,   Right  ?   they put additional charges  ,   that
Besides the minutes  ,   is it also a charge  ?  
So  ,   uh  ,   he can talk to people there just like that  ,   well  ,   with  ,   uh  ,   his cellphone and they don't charge him  ,   well  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   that
international  ,   ¿right  ?  
yes  ,   And  ,   well  ,   for  ,   ah  ,   How do you say land line in Spanish  ?  
And  ,   and  ,   How is Texas these days  ?  
yes  ,   here too  ,   is really nice  .   What  ,   what  ,   what part of Texas do you live in  ?  
Very hot  .   And are you from the City of Juarez  ?  
And you speak both languages  ?  
And what was the company that you used for the cellular  ?  
What is it called  ?  
Ah  ,   I don't know it  .   Do you have mobile over there  ?  
Have  ,   what  ?  
yes  ,   yes  .   And  ,   mm  ,   look at the traffic  ,   it makes me mad  ,   how can people drive and talk by the phone at the same time  ?  
Really  ?  
And when I had the T Mobile plane  ,   I got familiar with it  .   I said  ,   what parts of the United states did I think of being in  ?    And how to cover these parts  ?    So  ,   I also included
But  ,   here there's a lot  ,   Do they have cricket over there  ?  
But  ,   I'm dumbfounded with all the people here that use the cellulars wherever  .   And  ,   I know  ,   I'm  ,   ah  ,   my friends  ,   tell me  ,   How  ,   is it that you don't have a cellular  ?  
yes  ,   is true  .   And even  ,   Do you remember the ghosts they had that were huge  ?  
It already looked like it was going to be  ,   ah  ,   that  ,   ah How do you say it  ?   That a plane would come down by
¿Huh  ?  
Oh  ,   well  ,   no  ,   well  ,   oh  ,   ¿what do they want  ?  
Well  ,   so  ,   ¿what do you think about cellphones  ?  
Oh  ,   i like them  ,   but  ,   ¿huh  ?  
¿You don't  ?  
Why be paying  ?  
and talk with someone  ?  
It's impossible  ,   just driving with one hand  ,   right  ?  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
for a week and I was laughing at my coworkers because  ,   my boss he was like  ,   hey could we give you a satellite phone  ,   just in case  ?  
But  ,   they are always looking for you to give you more work  ,   why don't you have a cellphone  ?   And he's like  ,   what for  ?   So that you can call me at night when I'm driving home just to ask me something  ?   No  .  
yes  ,   me too  .   I also called my sister in  ,   and she was in the car  ,   and ah  ,   I call you  ,   the other one said  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   I said  ,   Where are you  ?  
the recipe  .   Yes she called me there  ,   that do you know  ,   can  you give me the recipe  ?   as if I had the recipe in my head  ,   woman  .  
And what does he eat then  ,   potato  ?  
So it is  .   Well  ,   I make my rice  ,   I tell him  ,   I know you don´t like rice  ,   but today I will make rice  ,   and I say  ,   What do you want with your meat or something like that  ?  
And  ,   my little one is who wants now  ,   changing the coversation  ,   is  ,   ah  ?  
Little one  ,   Is he fifteen  ?   How old is the little one  ?  
yes  ,   he  ,   he  ,   exactly  ,   that's what he said  ,   no  ,   sir  .   I tell him  ,   no  ,   man  .   For what  ?   So that you're in school talking on the cellular phone
when you don't need to  ?  
Ah  ?  
Uh  ,   no  ,   that it's free  ,   i think  ,   no  ,    no  ,   no  ,   there it is  ,   i think  ,   i don't have a cellphone  ,   ¿why would i give one to you  ?  
I was watching there once  ,   ¿where was i  ?    ,   i was at the mall and  ,   uh  ,   i was in front of a McDonald's here  ,   inisde the mall
¿How was that  ?  
And they didn't even realize it  ?   And  ,   no  ,   did they realize that he was taking pictures  .  
I say  ,   Why do they have  ?  
But  ,   no  ,   that of the phone  ,   I say  ,   for what  ?  
¿What do you do  ?    ,   the six year old girl with a cellphone
I say  ,   that's a lie  ,   ¿who's she gonna call  ?  
¿Barney  ?  
¿Who's she gonna call  ?    ,   i say  ,   ¿who  ?  
I say  ,   ¿her grandmother  ?    ,   she's calling her mom
Hi  ,   ¿what's your name  ?  
My name is Annie  ,   ¿and yours  ?  
¿I'm sorry  ?  
¿how are you  ?  
¿how are you  ?    ,   very good and you  ?  
Fine  ,   hey  ,   where  ,   ¿where are you  ?  
¿You're in Miami too  ?  
Yeah  ,   well  ,   ¿where are you from  ?  
Yeah  ,   i mean  ,   you've practically lived here your whole life  ,   ¿right  ?  
¿And you  ?    ,   oh  ,   wow
Yeah  ,   I'm from Madrid  ,   besides  ,   yeah  ,   well  ,   i'm on the bus  ,   ¿can you hear me well  ?  
Well  ,   we have to talk about mobile phones  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   well  ,   cellphones
once again  ,   ¿what did you say  ?    ,   i didn't hear you  ,   I'm sorry
¿Hello  ?    ,   no  ,   that i  ,   uh  ,   i love to use the cellphone  ,   I'm completely addicted to the cellphone
More than here  ,   people don't use them much here  ,   ¿right  ?  
Oh  ,   and  ,   ¿is she very little  ?  
Oh  ,   that's nice  ,   that's nice  ,   and  ,   ¿is it your first daughter  ?  
¿is it your first child  ?  
¿you're having another  ?  
You must be so excited about your girl  ,   ¿right  ?  
I can imagine that to you  ,   it's even more than that  ,   right  ?  
Were you working outside of the house before or  ?  
Yeah and  ,   anyway  ,   I imagine that also with your daughter you couldn't now either  ,   no  ?    Work
I am happy  ,   yes I am happy  ,   you have told me  ,   she is twenty months old Does she walks  ?   Right  ?  
Oh  ,   what a happiness what a happiness  ,   well  .   Wait until she begins to touch everything and you will need to be very aware of everything that she doesn´t find any danger and that stuff Right  ?  
normal  ,   that's logical  ,   and what's her name  ?  
my friend Rebeca  ,   I'm so happy for your girl  .   Ans is she  ,   is she very  .    .    ?   Is she good  ?   does she eat well  ?   and cry a lot  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   and what are you doing here in the United States  ?  
sorry  ?  
He brought it  .   What do you do here in the United States  ?  
And how much do you have left  ?  
Do you know New York or Philadelphia  ?  
Did I speak with you the other night  ?  
They're talking about cell phones  ,   right  ?  
Or Hospitals  ,   if you go to a hospital  ,   how are going to have the phone on  ?  
I called and I said  from my house I called him and I said  ,   Where are you  ?    In my house but I'm going to go out
and we parked and we called her another time and we said  ,   Where are you  ?    And she said  ,   I went out to a party
the cell phone is also good because when you go shopping and you have someone at home you can call and ask  ,   what do you need  ?  
Or what don't we need  ?  
hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
yes  ,   Who's speaking  ?  
What did they do before the cellular phones  ?  
one looks at them  ,   they look at you bad like  ,   what are you listening to  ?   And  ,   no  ,   but  ,   they  ,   who are speaking  ,   in a loud voice  ,   are saying  ,  
for someone to come and take the Right  ?  
Mhm  ,   mhm  .   And  ,   for instance  ,   what do you think about  ?   the other question is  .   let's say  ,   people that drives while
¿Right  ?    ,   for
i have to drive  .   Not  ,   not both at the same time  .   And afterwords  ,   if the person crashes  ,   ¿what  ,   what are they going to do  ?    ,   ¿you know  ?    ,   they don't  ,   they don't think
The other thing that i  ,   well  ,   what i said  ,   but there's always a benefit in having  ,   having a cellphone  .   Although  ,   as you say  ,   right  ?    ,   uh
what would you do  ,   what did we do before that we can't almost live  ,   without the cellphone  ,   ¿right  ?  
for being without  ,   without the cellular  ,   right  ?  
But  ,   ah  ,   and   ,   then  ,   now is with the  ,   with the  ,   How do you say it  ?   the  ,   the  ,   features that the phones have  ,   that they have some cameras  ,   and they have music  ,   and they have
that can be eh  ,   How is it  ?   dangerous  .  
Right  ?   the technology  .  
So  ,   do you think there should be a rule  ,   or maybe  ,   a state wide regulation  ,   a law for all the States  ,   in which talking on the cellphone should be banned or that you are required to use an earphone  ?  
Hello  ?  
How are you  ?  
Very good  ,   very good  .   And what's your name  ?   Norma  ?   My name is Miguel Angel  .  
Well Norma  ,   where do you live  ,   where are you at  ?  
Aha  ,   And  ,   where are you from  ?  
Ah  ,   from Peru  ?   Aha  ,   aha  .  
yes Well nothing Norma  ,   we have to talk about cellular phones  ,   right  ?  
And  ,   and what do you  think  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?   Mm  .   yes  .  
And well  ,   really  ,   it's necessary nowadays  ,   right  ?   Having a cellular is necessary and although it can  ,   sometimes  ,   in
Mm  ,   yes  ,   but it's practical  ,   right  ?   Because  ,   for example  ,   you find yourself in an emergency and you don't have  ,   there's no phone
you know what happens  ?   that those things create the necessity  ,   because when mobile phones didn't exist
nobody had the need for them  ,   You know  ?  
Uh um  .   Oh  ,   yeah  ,   that's also true  ,   ¿right  ?  
It's a  ,   i know  ,   i recognize it's a useless need  ,   ¿you know  ?  
Yeah  ,   it's a ciu   ,   uh  ,   and that  ,   it's that we live in a consumer society  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   so
¿Right  ?    ,   and it's real   ,   really
No  ,   because before  ,   like you say  ,   before we didn't have  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   the cellphone  ,   or
¿Right  ?    ,   so uh  ,   no  ,   we lived without computers
they're  ,   it's just that  ,   they're necessary for living  ,   right  ?  
well it seems  ,   and well nothing happened  ,   and now you say  ,   oh my gosh  ,   how can I survive without the internet  ?  
You know  ?  
society  ,   right  ?   the
to see if Fulanito  ,   Melanito have answered me  ,   you know  ?   You're always wondering about your email  .  
And  ,   and  ,   uh  ,   before you didn't notice it wasn't there  ,   before  ,   you know  ?  
yes  ,   eh  ,   or  ,   I mean  ,   it has its advantages and disadvantages  ,   right  ?  
you know  ?   or  ,   for example  ,   during emergencies  .  
Is there  ,   is there an accident or anything and then you can tell  ,   do you know  ?   This is  ,   mmm  ,   it is
Yes  ,   this one  ,   this one yes  ,   this is very clear  ,   in reality no   ?   yes
This  ,   yes  ,   what happened was clear  .   How many times  ,   realistically  ,   you're missing the phone for emergencies   ?   Not many  .  
Many times too  ,   many times too right   ?   When the people are very distracted talking at the phone  ,   or at the cell  ,   how do you call it  ,   many times
accidents happen no   ?   Because the people that care more  ,   they get more excited at the phone  ,   about news or who they're talking to and whatnot
And they can cause accidents too  ,   no   ?  
Yes  ,   yes I saw  ,   no   ?   It's true  ,   many people are here at the phone and driving  ,   no   ?  
To the  .    .    .   yeah  ,   well  ,   now  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   we're  ,   like i told you  ,   a city of consumption in everything
It's true  ,   and  ,   and it's the same  ,   ¿is it the same in Peru too  ?    ,   the  ,   the cellphones  ,   everyone's got the fever
¿Have you been in the United States for ten years without going back to Peru  ?  
But  ,   ok  ,   ¿and why is that  ?  
Not even for christmas  ?   or
No  ,   i always  ,   well  ,   i get in touch with the family  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   with my mom and my brothers  ,   but in the end
¿Nothing  ?    ,   yeah  ,   but no  ,   but you haven't seen them in ten years
Oh dear  ,   that's sad  ,   ¿isn't it  ?  
¿Don't you want to go  ?    ,   ¿wouldn't you want to go  ?  
Well  ,   i would like to go  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   but it's ok  ,   and no
Oh dear  .   That's hard  ,   ¿isn't it  ?    ,   ten years  ,   oh dear
I have been here for a year and i already want to go see my family a bit  ,   and  ,   because i have  ,   i live here  ,   but  ,   well  ,   but i would like to  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   and see them and that  ,   ¿right  ?  
Sure  .   ¿Do you have a wife and children  ?  
Sorry  ?  
¿Do you have a wife and children  ?  
No  ,   ¿do  ,   do  ,   uh  ,   do i have children  ?  
Yeah  ,   or a wife  ?  
and  ,   and my grandmother  ,   poor soul she's very sick now  ,   You know  ?   And she's already very old  ,   she's eighty nine years old  .  
and they tell me  ,   how are you  ?   I don't know what  ,   Are you working  ?   Such  ,   and well they call me  ,   now is a little more rare  ,   because you know there are six hours difference with Spain  .  
Sometimes they call me at some strange hours  ,   but well  .   And  ,   but my grandmother is doing really bad now  .   You know  ?   She's very sick and we believe
we don  we don't think she will get through it  .    You know  ?  
Yes  ,   yes she's eighty nine years old  .    You know  ?  
illnesses  ,   or pain  ,   or anything  .    You know  ?  
You know  ?    Illnesses  .    Sure  ,   sure  .    But well  ,   it seems that
it seems that she could say enough  .   You know  ?  
I don't know  ,   ¿you know  ?    .   Man  ,   i had the idea that maybe it was the last time i saw her  ,   ¿you know  ?  
Yeah  ,   well  ,   that's really what you see around you  ,   a lot of people  ,   i mean  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   they abandon their body  ,   they die
Do have grandparents  ,   do you have grand parents  ,   parents  ,   Norma  ?  
Well  ,   i have my mom and my sisters  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   in Peru
No  ,   my  ,   my  ,   my relatives  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   my
¿Right  ?    ,   my uncles
But is always hard  .   You know  ?  
Of course  ,   always  ,   one has that attachment  ,   right  ?  
Family relationships  ,   and one always  ,   always feels  ,   right  ?  
because they were  ,   my grandparents on my mother's side have always been very close  .   You know  ?  
We've always had them really close to us  ,   with us  ,   and  ,   you know  ?   So then  ,   well is a stronger relationship  .   But well  ,   look  ,   I don't know  ,   that's how things are  .   You know  ?  
Well  ,   that happens  ,   well no  ,   this world nothing is forever in this material world  ,   right  ?   there are always temporary things
in Spain  ,   television didn't exist when they were born  ,   you know  ?  
and look at all the changes that have  happened during his lifetime  ,    you know  ?   the  ,   the  ,   eh  ,   they've experienced so many changes during their lives  .  
they'd let me  ,   many people  ,   no  ?   that are  ,   eh  ,   that are older think that the life they had before was better than this one
That's right  ,   well look  ,   no  ?   they went from not having a television  ,   yes  ,   because it didn't exist  ,   no television  ,   no phones  ,   well phones
there might have been phones already but very few  ,   you know  ?  
And well  ,   i mean  ,   because i am thirty years old  ,   ¿you know  ?    ,   but
So no  ,   but it's true  ,   so  ,   ¿and do you have  ,   do you have children  ,   do you have children  ?  
Oh  ,   of course  ,   of course  ,   ¿do you work outside home too  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   is hard  ,   right  ?   because one is the whole time with the kids  .  
Hi  ,   yes good evening  ,   who am I talking to  ?  
yes  ,   cell phones  ,   yes  ,   really  ?  
and first she told me 'come at three o'clock'  ,   but then she called me and told me to go at four  ,   and I told her  ,   'you know what  ?   I will come at five o'clock  ,   and if you call again I won't come at all'
which ones  ?   oh  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   absolutely
I don't know that district  ,   Roosevelt  ?   oh  ,   no  ,   I don't know Long Island
yes  ,   in Long Island  ,   oh  ,   you don't know Long Island  ?   Where in Pennsylvania do you live in  ?  
oh  ,   ok  ,   and you are Puerto Rican  ,   aren't you  ?  
no  ,   I'm Cuban  ,   yes  ,   so you are Puerto Rican  ?   oh that's cool  ,   mhm
yes  ,   oh  ,   you do  ?  
ah  ,   that happened in last year's study  ?  
really  ?   I think I remember now  ,   but  ,   you are not doing it now are you  ?  
you know  ,   you are home and  ,   what do you do during the day  ,   do you have a job  ?  
oh  ,   yeah  ?    Oh  ,   oh  ,   okay  ,   oh  ,   house painter  ?  
sorry  ?    portraitist  ,   portraitist
house painter  ?   no what  ,   what's a portraitist  ,   oh portrait  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   I see  .    Oh  ,   oh  ,   that's nice  ,   yeah
yes thanks  ,   and and so  ,   u  the cell phone  ,   Do you usually charge it or almost never charge it  ?  
you can't say that  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   oh  ,   there is a cop coming  ,   i better hang up  ,   yeah
Yeah  ,   yeah  ,   and  ,   and he was furious when we got there  ,   ¿why did you hang up on me  ?    ,   and she said "because there was a cop"  ,   and she said "¿isn't it true  ?  "  ,   and i said yeah
a cop  ,   and they give her a ticket ¿right  ?    ,   and she uses that ear thing  ,   he says  ,   but she had that ear thing  ,   she couldn't hear you
at what timw will you come back  ?   when will you come back  ?   when eh  ?   and my  ,   my  ,   my partner as a clown also talks a lot  ,   a lot on the phone
ah how funny  ,   yea  ,   yes  ,   that was at your church  ?  
ah  ,   yes  ,   ah  ,   uh  ,   what do you do there  ?  
uh huh  ,   and in  ,   and what part of New York are you in  ?   ah  ,   yea
and  ,   what are  how are the public high schools in Long Island  ?   bad  ?  
Ah  ,   Texas  ?  
What's the weather like down there  ?  
Sorry  ?  
What's the weather like down there  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   eh  ,   well it's almost summer not here  ,   and you  ,   what's your name  ?  
Ah  ,   David  ,   and you are  ?  
in Ah  ,   Connecti  and what's the weather like there  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   but is it getting worse or is it getting more or less  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
yes  ,   I know  ,   but yes  ,   the people from Texas but there are a lot of Hispanics down there  ,   right  ?  
they are black  ,   right  ?  
Really  ?  
yes  ,   because how one  ,   one felt like before it was different  ,   right  ?   Now it's going to be  ,   it starts changing for the good
Mm  ,   how do you feel about that  ?   No  ,   you don't know  ?  
And  ,   And  ,   and  ,   where   ,   where are you from  ?  
And why do you speak Spanish  ?  
Ah  ,   but you speak Spanish very well  ,   how long did you have to study it  ?  
yes  ,   really  ?  
do use a cellular phone  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
if they give the incoming calls free is  ,   it comes out favorable right  ?   because one pays more or less like sixty dollars a month and can use the phone however
They round out the minute  ,   right  ?   yes
and other companies also charge the incoming  ,   right  ?   The calls that come in  .  
Ah  ,   yes  ?    T mobile  ?  
And in exchange  ,   does Spring have good reception  ?    Does Sprint work well  ?  
to control the use of cell phones when people are driving  ?  
if you  ,   say  ,   have an accident  ,   they will ask  ,   oh  ,   cell phone  ?    They will say that you can't
Uh  ,   yea it's  ,   it's the law now  ?   I didn't know that it was an approved law
I say  ,   it's always very attractive and all  ,   but it's true eh  ,   that you have to have money to buy them  ,   no  ?  
And afterwards  ,   well  ,   then you have to maintain it  ,   because also the contracts are minimum of one year  ,   right  ?  
you want a change  ,   no  ?  
And  ,   and well  ,   does Sprint have this  ,   of the  ,   eh  ,   mm  ,   like T mobile has for family members  ,   that you can talk amongst yourselves  ,   or not  ?  
Hmm  .    What part of Mexico are you from  ?  
Oh  ,   yeah  ?    Mexico City
Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   do you speak Spanish  ?  
Ah  ,   how are you  ?  
Good  ,   and you  ?  
Good  .   What's your name  ?  
Um  .   What do you think of cell phones  ?  
Do you have one  ?  
And you  ?   Ah  .  
And where did you live  ?  
And you  ?  
In Florida and there  ,   people have  ,   everybody has a cellphone  ,   isn't it  ?  
But  ,   that long  ,   people  ,   seven years ago they weren't so popular  ,   right  ?  
Mm  ,   and what do you think of the people that use them while in the streets and  ,   eh  ?  
Eh  ?  
That I know it's dangerous  .   And what do you think about what they say  ?   That the radiation might be bad  ?   Of the phones  .   Do you think is bad  ?  
Mm  .   I haven't heard much of that  .   I don't know  .   I hope not  .   What do they say  ?  
And it's not known if it's safe  .   right  ?  
And  .   What else can we talk about  ?  
And where are you from  ?  
What part  ?  
Are you from the United States or  ?  
And you've called here a lot  ?  
what was I going to tell you  .   Have you heard the phones  ?   Have you heard the new phones that have come out now  ?  
Is that high fashion in the United Stater or  ?  
And do you want to have one of those or not  ?  
You don't use the internet much  ?  
But you wouldn't use this telephone  ?  
Yes  .    Huh  ?  
You wouldn't use this telephone  ?  
It's pretty small  ,   right  ?  
Or yeah  ,   than speaking  ?  
And this is good money  .   So  ,   eh  ,   are you there  ?  
What are you going to do with a mobile or what  ?  
Is it still expensive there  ?  
They already like it  ,   right  ?  
Is it still expensive talking on the phone there  ?  
yes  .   And what do you think of the people The people that are on the streets that have earphones  ,   they don't carry the phone  ?   Have you seen them  ?  
You don't like that  ,   why not  ?  
Eh  ,   okay  .   And  ,   what model phone do you have  ?  
Ah  ,   um  .   And  ,   is it small  ?  
Why  ?   Ah  .  
Ah  .   Mm  .   And what does your phone have  ,   does it have a camera  ?  
And you have ringtones and that  ,   a lot  ?  
And does it seem like people who have ringtons are that rare  ?  
uh huh  .    Oh yeah  ?  
Oh yeah  ?  
oh  ,   really  ?  
Ambulance  ,   or the sound of an old telephone  ,   a ring ring telephone like the ancient ones  ,   right  ?  
yes  .   Oh  ,   what else did you want to talk about  ?  
Oh yeah  ?  
Hello  ?   oh  ,   yes  ,   this is Alex  ,   I live in Los Angeles  ,   who is that  ?  
this is Tami  ,   I live in Seattle  ,   Alex  ,   haven't we talked before  ?  
aha  ,   about the salsa  ,   aha  ,   I recalled your voice  ,   so  ,   what do you think about cellular phones  ?  
to a gas station to call on  ,   on a public phone or a free poley or towing you understand me  ?    ,   the tow truck
and I said  ,   you have to pay this contract and I said  ,   who will pay it  ,   you  ,   how you talk but you don't notice  ?    I say  ,   I'm going to have more minu 
they asked you for a contract  ?    hmm
ah  ,   yes  ,   I said  ,   no  ,   no I don't want this  ,   and I said to him  ,   what for  ?    for when you're at school and talking on the telephone  ?    no
use the  ,   the  ,   what's it called  ?    the walkie talkie
Oh  ,   really  ?  
and  ,   and  ,   I thought  ,   what the hell do these students need the phones for  ?  
yes  ,   that's what they are saying  ,   that this is happening in junior high and in college  ,   it's like you know  ?   the camera  ,   you can watch movies  ,   it's like  ,   I mean a video
I mean  ,   that's what I'm talking about  ,   why do you want  ,   why do you fight for a phone if you don't need one during classes  ?   You are supposed to be paying attention  .  
I mean  ,   what do you do  ,   I tell them  ,   who are you calling  ,   Barney  ,   who  ?   grandma  ?   well  ,   borrow  ,   borrow your mother's phone
Ah  ,   nice to meet you  ,   how are you  ?  
Same  .   Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Ah  .   Fine thanks  .   My name is Josefina in Philadelphia  .   And you  ?  
Ah  ,   a pleasure  ,   have you been already several eh weeks with this plan or are you starting  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?   Ah  ,   okay  ,   I was there with my dad and
the TV is on  .   And then this man  ,   about some topic I don´t but sometimes you  ,   how do you say it  ?   repeat yourself over and over again  ,   I don´t know
Ah  ,   cell phone  ,   right  ?  
people tried to hide in a phone booth or something  ,   no  ?  
to not be heard  ,   right  ?  
I at least drive  ,   but I pull over each time the cellphone rings  ,   when I can  ,   right  ?  
But that's is  ,   right  ?   We think about other things  ,   and we should be more concentrated  .   Do you drive  ?  
Oh  ,   you don't use the cell phone either  ?  
a work where I had to attend calls  ,   emergency calls from children  ,   right  ?    .   When I worked with children
I don't know  ,   do you work  ?  
things  ,   right  ?  
And so I tried to look for her and when I called work they told me no  ,   Leticia died last week  ,   and I said  ,   what  ?  
My goodness  ,   how awful  ,   this was over there in Puerto Rico  ?  
How long you will have this chance  ,   right  ?  
No one is perfect  ,   right  ?    No  ?  
shower and quickly to school  ,   and it upsets me because sometimes I would like to spend more time with them  ,   right  ?   But I was always working
I was always in a rush  .   I think my mom took more care of him than myself  .   But this is something you learn afterwards  ,   isn't it  ?  
racing all the time  ,   yes  ,   we talk after and I'll tell you  .   And have you been here in Georgia for a long time  ?   In the State  ?  
how good  ,   did you graduate  ?  
Wow Look and The hurricane didn't affect you  ?  
Mm  ,   how nice and did you guys get a lot of people from there also  ?   The ones that were going to other states  ?  
all possible  .   ah  ,   and is the climate always like that like Miami  ?  
Hot  ?  
But it doesn't snow  ?  
Hello  ?  
Ah  ,   how are you  ?    What's your name  ?  >
Junior  .    Whom am I speaking with  ?  
Sorry  ?  
With whom am I speaking  ?    Junior  .  
How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Where are you from  ?  
from Maryland  ?  
Oh  ,   how old are you  ?  
Oh  .    And you live in Spain  ?  
oh  ,   good  ,   what part of New York  ?  
We have to talk about mobile phones  ,   yeah  ,   ¿right  ?  
¿Do you  ,   do you have a cell phone  ?  
¿Yeah  ?  
¿What's that about the  ?  
¿Yeah  ?    ,   i don't know that
¿Like a what  ?  
Oh  ,   those are bigger  ,   right  ?  
And how log have you had that cellphone  ?  
that long  ?  
Since you had 13 years old  ?  
And  ,   have you had a cellphone for a long time  ?  
Or you don't have one  ?  
yea  ,   where in New York are you  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
Ah well I well I'm not familiar with it  ,   do you have to pay for the phone  ,   or no  ?  
Uh huh  .    And what do you do here in New York  ?  
they had songs  ,   they had rare songs  ,   here they don't have much of this  ,   no  ?  
Eh  ?  
what do you do there in New York  ,   work  ,   go to school or what  ?  
Oh  ,   you're a student  ?  
Where  ?  
yes well I'm seeing whether I do it or not  .   You live in the dorm room today  ?  
what  ?  
DO you live in school or do you have an apartment  ?  
Or what  ?  
oh  ,   like you sleep with another person  ?   You don't sleep with them  ?  
oh  ,   and you pay it all the two of you  ?  
Oh  ,   and how is going at school  ?   what is he studying  ?  
Oh  ,   we could also talk about  ,   about  ,   what we think about these regulations that ban talking by phone on the car  ,   while driving  ,   here you can talk while you drive   ,  can't you  ?  
You can't  ?  
what  ?  
And  ,   do you know how many car accidents I have seen caused by talking on the phone  ?  
yes but we  ,   how do you say I'm like this  ?    I don't look for noise but if there's someone  ,   we catch him ans we send him outside
Do you speak English  ?  
English is better  ?  
hello  ?  
hello  ?  
so so  ,   you were born here then  ,   no  ?  
Do you consider yourself to be Puerto Rican or from the United States  ?    From Puerto Rico  ,   surely  .  
And what languages do you speak  ?  
Oh  ,   but you're from Spain  ,   right  ?  
And the father went to  ?  
Huh  ?    I don't know either but since she's older like ninety three
And the rest of your family  ,   they're all from Puerto Rico  ?  
yes  ?    And you don't think about what you will do if you don't get into the police in the end  ?  
of what  ?  
Yes  ?  
A restaurant or a deli  ?  
Like what  ?  
hello hello eh whom am I speaking with  ?  
yes  ,   how did you say  ,   what's your name  ?  
and how are you  ?  
yes where are you from  ?  
yes and you  ?  
and and where do you live  ?  
ah in Philadelphia  ,   and what do you think of the university there  ?  
how good  ,   ehh  ,   so  ,   I don't know  ,   what do you think about cellular phones  ?  
to be too what  ?  
and have you been teaching for many years  ?  
of course  ,   of course very good and and in Cuba  ,   can you go to Cuba or visit  ?  
and the other he was telling me all well that he returned very impacted in other words on one side on how beautiful it was and on the other on how much there's lacking right  ?  
material things right  ?   what's lacking
what  ?  
are you teaching class to the kids tomorrow also  ?  
and do they also take mobiles take cellular to class yes  ?  
yes well  ,   this happens even at the university  ,   no  ?    That people should  ,   I don't know
hmm  ,   turn it off  ?  
even though well  ,   sometimes it's really easy to forget it  ,   no  ?    This happened to me in Spain when
the train is more annoying than two people speaking normal  ,   right  ?   I mean when
Hello  ?  
How are you  ?  
Good  ,   and you  ?  
We spoke before  ,   right  ?  
Aha  .    Now we have to talk about cell phones  .    Do you have a cell phone  ?  
Me too  .    And you drive  ?  
In what  ?  
I told him  ,   Are you crazy  ?  
well  ,   eh  ,   it came out free right  ?   the minutes that the cellular has  ,   that can be used in any part of the United States  ,  
Then  ,   when you call there  ,   from here  ,   is it like if you are calling abroad  ?   Do you get charged for long distance  ?  
And  ,   you're in Texas  ,   Right  ?  
Yes  ?  
I  ,   sometimes think  ,   how would I do it  ?   like the old people  ,   you see them  ,   and they don't carry them  .  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
Really  ?    Because I  ,   since I put my  ,   eh  ,   ah  ,   in the house  ,   and the cell phone numbers  .    And after about a month and a half  ,   I never received another call  .  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   How is it going  ?  
How are you  ?   Mercedes' speaking  .  
I don't know what about dating  ,   dating  .   What's that  ?   what was it telling you  ?  
Darting  .   Could it be darting how  ?  
really  ?  
I imagine is like online dating  .   Right  ?  
Well  ,   let's see  ,   have you ever  ,   ever  ,   did blind dating  ,   or  ,   or over the internet  ?  
Me neither  .   Oh really  ?  
And  ,   why did they look on the internet  ,   or  ,   or how  ?  
yes  .   And  ,   that  ,   eh  ,   I have known people that in the same city  ,   right  ?   They got to know each other that way  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .   And did they end up together  ?  
I  ,   maybe  ,   like I said before  ,   eh  ,   What did I said  ?   to know the person  .   Because  ,   it is a good  ,   is another way of meeting people  .   But  ,  
yes  ,   is like to know somebody at a bar  ,   really  ,   you don´t know that person  ,   and you meet him  ,   and you start to talk  .   Right  ?  
I don´t think so  ,   I am never going to need to use it  .   Eh  ,   are you single Right  ?  
No  .   Ah  ,   Are you married too  ?   Maybe  ,   ah  ,   no  .   I don´t think I  ,   I don´t think I would use it  .   Well  ,   at first  ,   I will not have the need
Here  ,   what's in  ,   is something called speed dating  ,   have you heard about speed dating  ?  
And this one they are going to organize would only be for Spaniards  ?  
Mm  .   Two thing about that  .   One  ,   I find it like very pressing  ,   right  ?  
well  ,   yes  .   Pressure on  ,   saying the right phrase  ,   right  ?   in those two minutes  ,   and give a good impression  .   And the other
You get depressed  ,   yes  ,   that's right  .   But  ,   what actually happens is that men note down all of the women  ,   right  ?   Then  ,   it's enough if one women chooses him
I don't know  ,   if I say that these new ways of  ,   these  ,   I mean  ,   via e mail and things like this  ,   it's not that new  ,   right  ?   But this speed dating  ,  
Really  ?  
Because  ,   well  ,   I tell you  ,   it's like a game  ,   right  ?    .   The idea is not getting a date  ,   I don't need a date right now
What do you think of that  ?  
I don't know  .   The truth  ,   eh  ,   because  ,   in theory  ,   is not very different to all this  .   Right  ?   But  ,   I've always had a little bit of distrust for those ads  .  
And  ,   that's why I say  ,   in theory  ,   is the same as by the internet  .   Right  ?   Because  ,   yes  ,   let's say  ,   in match dot com  ,  
basically  ,   how many times they say  ,   I'm looking for a woman  ,   but I'm like this and like that  ,   right  ?  
Yes  .    Eh  ,   yes  ,   eh  ,   and it's also  ,   hmm  ,   the  ,   the other too  ,   the other method  ,   also  ,   was in the chat rooms  .    Right  ?  
No  ?  
Also  ,   another  ,   also  ,   that I use a lot  ,   is Craigslist  .   I don't know if any  ,   and I've also seen that it also has  ,   eh  ,   like it has classifications  ,   right  ?    ,   where they put  ,  
Hello  ?  
Did you understand today's subject  ?  
Other people do  ,   I know it may work  ,   because I've heard of many cases in which it did work  ,   you know what I mean  ?  
They have to pay for all the expenses  ,   airport taxes  ,   passage  ,   all that  ,   and they get women  ,   and most of them are very happy with the women because it's said that oriental women are very  ,   how is it  ?   very devoted to her man
that it has been used by many people to be  ,   how you call it  ?    ,   to be unfaithful to their partner
the conversations they hold with other women  ,   so  ,   I think it's suitable for many things  .   You know what I mean  ?   I myself  ,   find it very productive
Oh  ,   let's see  ,   how would I say this  ?    ,   the last in personal relation  ,   because has a lot of  ,   yes exactly
No  ,   no  ,   how is it  ?    ,   and after  ,   people is saying  ,  I'm bored  ,   I'm bored but they don anything  ,   sitting all day in front of a computer
Aha  ,   aha  ,   yes  ,   there twenty thousand impostors and you think it is a kind of person  ,   how can I tell you  ?   I have a friend of mine that the guy took everything she had  ,   she even lost her house
He took all she had  .   And she can't do anything because she had already signed  ,   and everything was on his name  .   What can she do  ?   Nothing  ,   she couldn't do nothing
Ah hi  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine My name is Josefina  ,   I'm in Philadelphia  ,   where are you  ?  
But  ,   well  ,   here we are  .   How are you  ,   good  ?   Eh
Happy with the program  ?   In calling  .  
And I see that  ,   that also I didn't even understand the first word today  .   What's  ,   what is the topic  ,   he said  ,   calls  ?  
Yes  ,   Listen Josefina  ,   and tell me then you're in Philadelphia and what  ,   are you  ,   do you study or work  ,   in  ,   in Penn  ?  
But where were you born  ,   over there  ,   I believe in Europe right  ?  
Yes Ah really  ?   You've been
you've been already fifteen years  sixteen years right  ?  
But  ,   how did you get the American nationality  ?  
been without going to Venezuela  ?  
Wow  ,   You don't miss it  ?   You don't have family there  ?  
And you spoke English or no  ?  
Oh  ,   and Spain  ,   which part are you from  ,   Madrid  ?  
Ah yes  .   How many years ago were you in Madrid  ?  
Ah  ,   like mo  before coming here  ,   about twenty years ago  ?  
But yes  ,   you liked it  ?  
They they didn't let me Look  ,   and  ,   and when do you finish your school  ?  
Really  ?  well
Ah  ,   well take down mine  .    Do you have a pencil  ?  
Aha  ,   but I thought I heard you mentioned your cellphone  ,   no  ?   To the cellphone  ?  
But it's two fifteen right  ?  
I don't know  ,   anyways  ,   do you use the Internet  ?  
They still are going out even if they stay there  ,   true  ?  
Are you going to go during Christmas or something like that  ?  
That's nice  ,   ¿and did you celebrate it the European way  ?  
Oh really  ?  
yes  ,   who am I talking to  ?  
eh  ,   Michael and who is this  ?  
eh  ,   I'm Silvia  ,   I'm in Philadelphia and you  ?  
yes  ,   eh  ,   which is the  ,   which is the  ?  
they should speak a better Spanish  ,   don't you think  ?  
Really  ?  
But I've talked to some men who have told me that they have used it and  ,   those services and I tell them and Why  ?  
um  ,   and what do you do in Philadelphia  ?  
yes  ,   I stayed  .    Are you at Penn  ?  
ah nice  ,   and what country are you from  ?  
from Cuba  ,   how nice  ,   and what do you think about the situation that's in Cuba now  ?  
ah  ,   I'm not in favor of this  ,   I would like to be  ,   I would like to be in Cuba  ,   and you  ,   what country are your mom and dad from  ?  
How are you  ?  
Eh  ,   good And you  ?  
I want to put to sleep  .   Where are you calling from  ?   From where are you calling  ?  
What  ?   I'm in New York  .  
And you  ?  
And ah  ,   you know that I didn't understand too much what the topic was about  .   Did you understand it  ?  
Of what  ?  
And where are you from  ?  
Ah  ,   I'm Peruvian  ,   and you  ?  
What  ?  
No  .    And how is it for you  ,   what do you think  ?  
Where are you going to find them then  ,   in a bar  ?    A bar isn't  ,   it's not a good place to meet people either  ,   above all they're drunk
And  ,   ¿and are you married or single  ?  
Two girls  ,   ¿what  ,   what ages  ?  
Are they sleeping now or not yet  ?  
what thing  ?  
But Well they learn that way  ,   one way or another they learn  .   And how long have you been married  ?  
Oh  ,   I'm Joe  ,   ¿what's your name  ?  
Nice to meet you  ,   ¿where are you from  ?  
¿You live in Denver  ?    ,   that's good
Yes  ,   i live here in Denver  ,   and well  ,   uh  ,   the subject is  ,   it's about the internet  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   about how you connect  ,   how you go  ,   like that  ,   meeting people
¿That was the subject  ?    ,   it figures
Oh  ,   ok  ,   well  ,   no  ,   try  ,   try to  ,   like that  ,   well  ,   like my friends or something  ,   over  ,   over the e mail  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   well  ,   yes  ,   i talk to them  ,   but like
getting someone you can go out with  ,   no  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   i have never  ,   uh  ,   done anything like that  ,   ¿have you  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   no  ,   yes  ,   that's why i have never  ,   uh  ,   tried to do it like that  ,   ¿right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  .   Like that is good  .   Right  ?  
And you enter  ,   well  ,   international chat rooms  ,   or Spanish ones  ,   or how do you do it  ?  
but it makes me feel  ,   it makes me feel like I'm still closed to the island  .   Right  ?  
And were you born there in Albuquerque  ?  
Are you from  ,   from  ,   from Puerto  ,   Puerto Rico  ,   or what  ?  
And have you gone back to  ,   to  ,   well  ,   to know or to visit  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   that she gets to know it all  ,   right  ?  
So then  ,   do you have many  ,   do you have many friends in many parts of the world via the Internet  ?  
yes  ,   as well  .   right  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   or Spain  .   Right  ?   Spanish  .  
yes  ,   by  ,   by New York and Philadelphia  ,   No  ?    Places like this  .  
But  ,   no  ,   you see one  ,   sometimes the stores here  ,   and hey  ,   a lot of people speaking Spanish  .   And what internet service do you use  ?  
Ah  ,   if I use the internet  ?    Yes  ,   for  ,   for studying  ,   because I'm  ,   I'm a student now  .    And  ,  
You study  ,   you take your classes on the internet  ?  
articles and  ,   sorry  ?  
You look  ,   you take your classes on the internet  ,   or you find references on the internet  ?  
What is your work  ?  
And what do you do or are you just a student  ?  
And is there a lot of demand there in  ,   in Albuquerque  ,   or in New Mexico  ?  
Um  ,   well  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   all that of  ,   of organic food  ,   and well  ,   being healthy  .   Things like that  .   Right  ?  
We don't have much time left for  ,   how long  ?  
Ah  ,   They give us like six  ,   or like  ,   how much is it  ,   ah  ?  
Oh  ,   Is it the first time  ?  
Hold on  ,   let me just make sure Hey  ,   come here  ,   you  .   I think your phone is all messing up  .   Hello  ?   What are you doing  ?   plant
hello  ,   hello  ,   who am I talking too  ?  
Silvia  ,   from New York  ,   is that you  ?  
Where do you live Junior  ?   Eh  ,   I'm in Philadelphia
Ah  ,   Philadelphia  ,   how old are you  ?   Hello  ,  
oh  ,   how old are you  ?  
how old  ?  
why do you want to know my age  ?  
ah well  ,   do you believe that  ?  
Well  ,   what do you think about this  ?  
ah  ,   you tried it  ?  
how's that  ?    ahhh  ,   yeah  ,   the relationship ended
ahh and  ,   and you have a daughter together  ?  
how old is the girl  ?  
hmm  ,   what's her name  ?  
what's the girl's name  ?  
she's from  ,   what was the best solution for you  ?  
yes  ,   because dating doesn't mean this  ,   right  ?  
What does dating mean  ?  
mhm  ,   how did you find out about this survey  ?  
aha and how often do they do this because I knew of one a year and a half ago around there but that was the only one I've known of  .   How often do they do this study  ?  
that's the only one I knew of  ,   have there been others then  ?  
since then  ?  
Uh um  ,   ¿and what office do you call later to ask about that  ?  
Let me write it down  ,   ¿ok  ?    ,   eight
Ok  ,   ok  ,   yeah i will call there to have them consider me  ,   yeah  ,   ¿and how long will this study last  ?  
¿They have what mixed  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿and you can sign up to do the Spanish and the English one too  ?  
¿On the computer  ,   how  ?  
To meet and to go out  ,   how are they changing relationships  ?    ,   ¿how does the dynamics between men and women change  ?  
I am nos sure  ,   ¿and you  ?  
How are you  ?  
Where are you calling from  ?  
ah ah I'm here in Arizona  .   And you  ?  
Where are you  ?   oh yes
Good well  ,   Is Spanish your first language  ?  
Are you going to school for that  ?  
What about you  ?  
ah  ,   today's subject  ,   ah  ,   I have never done that  ,   online dating  ,   what about you  ?  
Have you experienced that  ?  
have you  ?   Me either  .  
but I know Of what  ?  
Do you have a computer in the house  ?  
I've seen oh  ,   just recently  ,   I've seen lots of ads of an internet service called Harmony dot com  ,   have you seen them  ?  
Arizona but that´s near Colorado  ,   right  ?  
oh  ,   did you like it  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Who is this  ?  
Let's see  ,   what was your worst date with someone  ?  
and when one goes to see him  ,   is like  ,   ah  ,   my God  ,   Why did I come  ?   But  ,   yes  ,   and  ,   and  ,   also
And has it ever happened to you that you go out with someone  ,   to a restaurant  ,   and at the end it doesn't work out  ?  
And at the end not so cute  ?  
Mm  .   And  ,   but you say you met your husband through  ICQ  ?  
without knowing each other  ,   Right  ?  
And  ,   we talked ah  ,   What  ?   in the  ICQ a lot  ,   and then we exchanged phone numbers  .  
But you were  ,   you were in the same city  ?  
Peru  ,   places like that  ,   right  ?  
Ah  ,   good  ,   Right  ?  
Speed  ,   speed dating  ?   Oh  .  
Really  ?  
Is two minutes  .   Right  ?  
Eh  ,   what impression can one get  ?   Just  ,   eh  ,   physical  .  
But  ,   lets say  ,   uh  ,   if you like this boy  ,   oh  ,   and  ,   and  ,   and you like him  ,   you can tell in two minutes  ,   you can ask him ¿do you smoke or not  ?  
¿do you drink or not  ?    ,   uh  ,   ¿what else  ,   what else  ?    ,   oh  ,   i think you need to have a list of questions
For two minutes  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   and from there  ,   if you like his answers  ,   uh  ,   so you have to ask his phone number or someone else  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   i don't understand  ,   ¿how do you do that  ?  
yes  ,   and that's another thing  ,   well  ,   that  ,   the chance that they both like each other at the same time  .   Right  ?   yes  .   I agree  .   It seems
Yes  ,   and  ,   and you  ?  
No  ,   no  .   I haven't  .   Mm  ,   no  ,   I don't think so  .   Someone who was dangerous  ?   No  .  
Mm  .   yes  ,   it can be dangerous  ,   and more let's say  ,   one like this  ,   Right  ?   by internet  ,   one thinks that perhaps you're talking with  ,   you never know  .  
That's why  ,   little by little  ,   Right  ?  
Or how about when they tell you I'm this weight  ,   and this height  ?  
Bu  they pin you down and they put you in back of the shell  ,   you know  ,   that you're going to be pinned back there  ?  
For this my mom said  ,   no  .    No  ,   better not  .    Let's get out of here  ,   and I went with my makeup and everything  .    My dad didn't know anything  ,   or my brother  ,   or my mother  .    Right  ?  
But  ,   lucky that you mom was with you  .    Because  ,   what if  ?    Well  ,   you never know  ,   sometimes  ,   right  ?  
Maybe the impulse  ,   or maybe not  .    I was talking with him for a long time  ,   I know that he wouldn't do anything to me  .    Right  ?  
yes Right  ?  
She said  ,   no  ,   no  .    You know what  ?    Better not  ,   better not  .    We'll find another there  ,   or something like this  .    But better to go  ,   you don't know what he will to do you  .  
Ah  ,   Good evening  ,   how are you  ?  
how are you  ?    I'm Josefina in Philadelphia  ,   And you  ?  
Yes but well it's good  ,   we have a lot of people from all over  ,   No  ?  
aha yes  ,   they keep insisting  ,   No  ?  
aha  ,   and how are you  ?    What do you think about internet dating or
Well  ,   I  ,   hmm  ,   I think that  ,   you only meet a few good people  ,   no  ?  
since the year two thousand one I started to meet some people and we still haven't sent each other mail  ,   right  ?   Have you tried it too  ?  
Well  ,   I don't know if  ,   hello  ,   are the kids there  ?  
Ah  ,   they're already school age  .   How old are they  ?  
Ah  ,   they're already big  ,   well at the  ,   to the  ,   a girl or boy who's seven  ?  
yes  ,   there are many people who are  ,   are interested  ,   no  ?   they've
No  ,   some advantages  ,   no  ?   because many times you meet people who are really  ,   really friendly and
Yes  ,   many times  ,   no  ?   especially  ,   and if you're already  .   And you're already more or less alone  ,   no  ?   and you have
conversations and all of that  ,   at all times during the day  ,   right  ?  
I  ,   I'm in touch with  ,   I mean  ,   with my friends too  ,   right  ?  
Yes  ,   And do you study or are you at home  ?   ah  ,   Do you go to school  ?  
What do you say  ?   No NO  ,   no  ,   I  ,   I I joined a religiou society  .  
No  ?   and and I  ,   no  ,   I didn't go to school  ,   I didn't finish a degree  ,   I joined the temple  .  
You should look for a job  ,   very serious  ,   No  ?  
Here in Georgia  ?  
so much snow in winter Right  ?  
Ah  ,   And there's no threat now with that Hurricane that's coming by there  ?  
hey but this is  ,   I don't know what religions say about it  ,   I saw  ,   I don't know anything  ,   I believe that everybody is praying for all those people  ,   right  ?  
Yes  ,   here  ,   well I believe many cities did it  ,   right  ?   They went
from New Orleans so  ,   there are lots of people  ,   but some are still open  ,   right  ?   the Red Cross is
Sure  ,   it was really  ,   it was unexpected  ,   it was such a big tragedy  ,   right  ?  
Lots of people died  ,   the city shut down completely  ,   right  ?  
Yes  ,   well  ,   really  ,   that makes us realize that our material belongings  ,   our lives are temporal  ,   isn't it  ?   We really don't
and one should instead focus on family  ,   right  ?  
This is true  .    And you go  ?    Your husband is from there or he's American  ?  
ah  ,   okay  .    And since when have you stopped going to Peru  ?  
Yes  ,   Ah  ,   and your family is here  ?  
aye  ,   how great  .   They're real  ,   they sell them the whole year  ?    Here they only sell them in a certain season  .  
Well yes  ,   most of the time  .    No  ?    when it's the season  .  
and have you been called often  ,   from this program  ?  
Yes  ,   I mean  ,   since it started I've been called everyday  ,   right  ?   and sometimes
Oh  ,   you find the message in the machine  ,   right  ?  
and I didn't notice  ,   because since I was doing another thing I didn't notice  ,   but then it got fixed  ,   to my schedule  ,   right  ?  
Yes  ,   I think that at this time  ,   most of the people is at home  .   Well  ,   although there are time differences  ,   right  ?   between cities  ,   when it is
Do you have a central to call there  ?  
Oh  ?  
I still hadn't spoken to anyone from Los Angeles  ,   from this side because it seems to me that they mostly call people from the other side  ,   isn't it  ?  
aha  ?   Did you have blind dates  ?  
Wel  ,   It hasn't happened But  ,   if not we got to see my house  ,   for example  ,   No  ?  
place if you want to come by And And we get to know each other  ,   and like that  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   meet I didn't meet bad people  ,   just as well it was very serious people  ,   No  ?  
You're very young Right  ?   you have the voice of a young girl
It can't be  ,   really  ?  
how funny  ,   this made you laugh  ,   right  ?  
Ahhh  ,   Is your dad there  ?    How funny  ,   that's good and Aye  ,   God  .    Well I don't know  ,   they come
I'm Carmen  ,   from Chicago  ,   and you  ?  
Oh yes  ?   Look we're lucky
Look  ,   do you know the  ,   the uh  ,   the  ,   today's thing  ?  
Wow  ,   she didn't know who he was  ?  
But  ,   but you didn't look into um  ,   um  ,   his background or something  ,   you didn't ask someone how he was  ,   who he was or anything  ?  
Yes  ,   but she trusts you  ,   doesn't he  ?  
Halo Hi I'm Nicole  ,   How are you  ?  
Fine thank you  ,  Where are you from  ?  
And where are you from  ?  
eh  ,   I don't know  ,   I don't remember  ,   I don't think so  ,   of did I  ?  
What country are you from  ?  
ah  ,   yes Maybe we did talk How are you  ?  
And so  ,   things like that  ,   no  ,   no partners on the internet  .    Have you used the internet for a partner  ?  
yes  ?  
And how  ,   how  ?  
So How are your experiences when you meet the person you have been talking to  ?  
or your husband  ?  
yes  ,   she only went out with them  ,   I mean  ,   she says she didn't want a  ,   how you call it  ?   she didn't want a serious relationship with a man to be with him  ,   she just wanted to
if you like that  ,   I have seen the  ,   how you call it  ?    ,   the personals looking for couple
Hello  ,   Whom am I speaking with  ?  
Ah  ,   Mayra  ,   my name is Silvia  .   Where are you from  ,   Mayra  ?  
Ah  .   Really  ?   Where  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
Ah  ,   look at that And  ,     ?  
What year is your son in  ?  
Why  ?  
And how are you  ?   Listen  ,   And how did you find out about this program  ?  
Ah  ,   okay  ,   So he's also doing it  ,   or no  ?  
And  ,   and how is that you're studying  ,   um  ,   such a hard career like chemical engineering  ?  
Oh  ,   really  ?  
yes  ,   and how much is chemistry and how much is engineering in that degree  ?  
that are used  ,   instead of mechanical engineering  ,   for instance  ,   that are studying design  ,   right  ?  
Seriously  ?  
Ah  ,   okay  .    So  ,   you're good  .    I went to  ,   how does he like it  ?    I went to Cornell  .    Those were my two options  ,   Penn or Cornell  .  
No  ,   is too much already  .   Right  ?  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
sometimes  ,   a terrible loss of time  ,   so  ,   how can they not want to do more things  ,   or how can they be so happy doing so little  ?    And in exchange here  ,   we do a lot  ,   and if we have free time we want to do more
yes  ,   and aside from this  ,   What do you think of Philadelphia  ?  
Like which  ?  
yes  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   Mayra  ,   what is your surname  ?   Aha
And how about you  ?   How many years have you been living in Philadelphia  ?  
And before  ,   where did you live  ?  
yes  ,   it's true  .    And do you like Philadelphia  ?  
Hello  ,   good evening  ?  
Oh  ,   Miami okay  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine fine  ,   and you  ?  
Ah Aha  .   Do you already have several calls that you've made in this program  ?  
Right  .   Oh  ,   well  ,   i don't know  ,   i think a while ago you kinda payed more attention to that  ,   ¿right  ?  
around there  ?  
for example  ,   from school or stuff like that  ,   right  ?  
And you  ?  
But you're single or married or  ?  
And you  ?  
yes  ,   have you beeb there many years  ?  
I got married  ,   then we returned  .   We've been here now almost phew maybe  ,   like thirteen years  ?  
Ah  .   And did you get married in Puerto Rico  ,   or there  ?  
TON  ,   do you have any children  ?  
Oh  ,   look how nice  .   Will it be a boy or a girl  ,   do you know  ?  
Ah  ?  
So cute  .   They are attached to their mothers  ,   right  ?  
It changed  ,   it changed your mind a bit  ,   no  ?    yes  .  
Ah yes  ?  
yes
the clothes  ,   and bed  ,   and all that  .  
Hm
it was something that  ,   it didn't matter which color it was  .  
yes  ,   and  ,   and it's true  ,   one can't  ,   one can't whenever it needs  ,   you know  ,   for the  parents is more important for the bedroom to look nice  ,   whatever  .   The baby doesn't need any of that  .  
So yes
and tenderness and care  .  
also  ,   is it really hot there  ?   Now  ?  
Yes  ,   it is  .   Usually it is a bit cool lets say  ,   in December  ,   it can be in January  ,   a bit cool but I want to say that we have around seventy degrees  ,  
around seventy  ?  
That's nice  ,   yes  .  
You know  ,   but it's more than that  ,   no  .  
Oh okay  ,   have you been here in Philadelphia  ?  
And we too  ,   hm hmm  .   Never  .   I've never seen the snow either  .  
Oh  ,   oh  ,   boy  .   Look at that  .   Did you go to the university  ?  
Oh  ,   that's cool  .   You didn't go to work today  ,   right  ?  
And is free on Tuesday and Wednesday  .   And what happened to us  ?   that for a whole year I didn't see him and he didn't see me  ,   because
So
Sure  .   A couple must be in contact  ,   close contact and communication
yes  ,   so
Ah
you know  ,   it was a little hard but  ,   you know  ,   and specially living here  ,   it is very expensive  ,   very expensive
ye
yes
Are you in Miami  ?  
No  ,   I'm the south  ,   I'm in Homestead
Oh
That it's more south of Miami  ,   before getting in the cays
Oh  ,   okay  ,   okay
But  ,   many people does not know  ,   you know  ,   where is Homestead  ,   so  ,   we always say it's Miami  ,   But the difference  ,   let's say  ,   we are
from 30 or 40 miles to the south of Downtown Miami  ,   but
Mmm
You never realize that you are from one city to another  ,   let's say  ,   because it's
You have everything there  ,   with buildings and houses
And house  ,   and roads  ,   and you never realize that
Ir like you were inside Miami
yes  ,   yes
All the time  ,   is Miami Spring  ,   is it near  ?  
It would be  ,   at the north from where we are  ,   Miami Spring would be like 50 miles from here
Oh  ,   okay  ,   Well  ,   I don't know  ,   I have been in Miami  ,   but I went as a tourist and well  ,   then
yes
you are always in the downtown  ,   or in a beach
Yes
Miami Beach  ,   but it's tranquil there then  ,   no  ?  
Eh  ,   not too much  .   For this reason I wanted to go to another place  ,   because  ,   we have a lot  ,   eh I don't want to say Mexicans  ,   but that is what we have  .   And this is not important  ,   but they are a lot of the people that work with  ,   in
Hm
in  ,   ay ay ay
in the country
Yes  ,   and for this reason there is a lot not much ruckus  ,   but  ,   but  ,   it is not a
Hm  ,   ah yes
It is not very tranquil
A lot  ,   yes  ,   the population is big
One second
Ah  ,   but good  ,   little by little truth
Permit me  ,   yes yes  ,   God would like  ,   we
Yes  ,   little by little
We are going to move starting now  ,   because also the  ,   the houses are expensive
Hm  ,   I don't believe
and we don't have patio  .   So you know  ,   when we bought this house  ,   we didn't know that we could have kids  .   We were married for twelve years already
We thought that we were never going to have kids  .   Then two weeks after buying the house  ,   we noticed that  ,   you know  ,   I was pregnant with a girl
¿How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   thank you  ,   fine  ,   thanks
¿And where are you calling from  ?  
Oh  ,   I'm calling from New York
Oh  ,   ok  ,   Norma here from Atlanta  ,   Georgia
Atlanta  ,   Georgia  ,   right  ,   look  ,   uh
Right  ,   not Crisna  ,   please  ,   no
I didn't hear very well what the subject was  ,   what we're going to talk about  ,   uh  ,   uh  ,   what  ,   what we have to talk about
About the dates  ,   dating
Oh
About dating
Oh  ,   like dates  ,   like dating  ,   right  ,   right
Yes  ,   uh  ,   say  ,   that's what we had to talk about  ,   at first i didn't understand either
No  ,   because he/she was talking  ,   it was like a machine  ,   it was speaking Spanish like
yes
with an English accent  ,   ¿do you know what i mean  ?  
yeah  ,   no  ,   its
uh  ,   uh
It's the  ,   it's the machine  ,   I think  ,   or it's a person  .    Someone who doesn't speak Spanish well so
Well  ,   a
You can't understand
It seems like a machine  ,   who learned Spanish in a book  ,   you know  ?  
aha  ,   more or less like that
No  ,   originally in the house or something  .    But  ,   well  ,   well  ,   they say we have to talk about dates  .  
yes  ,   they say which were the best and good  ,   hmm  ,   worst dates that you had or something like this  ,   or  ,   how have dates changed over the years  ?  
yeah but I haven't had a date in a while  ,   Well  ,   I haven't had very good dates  ,   however  .    Eh  ,   I've had many more bad ones than good ones  .    But the thing is that in the date
and you  ,   you have a date with other people it's sometimes difficult  ,   you know  ?  
aha yes  ,   I've never been on dates  ,   really when  ,   like I entered a religious community  ,   and they don't do dates there  .  
well they do that now too  ,   but now it's more done on the internet  ,   right  .  
aha
And you have to pay lots of money  ,   do you understand  .   But the thing is that they charge you  .  
For  ,   that's why  ,   because the thing is that they need more men  ,   do you understand  ?  
ah  ,   yes
Because for every man there are like five or six women  ,   something like that  .  
ah it's good I already found my man
so when  ,   when you say that you're a man  ,   sometimes it says that it's free for men  .   for a while or something like that
yes because Because the more women that get a date with a man righ  ?  
aha
so they tell it to other women  .  
ah  ,   yes
Do you understand  ,   if women get on and don't need any  ,   any dates  .   So there is not much business for that  ,   for them
mhm
They say  ,   they said before that they want more men to make calls because there are many more women that make calls than men  .   ah  ,   what can I tell you  .  
mhm
and you don't know who that person is  ,   you don't know anything about that person  .  
Maybe you like sports and the other person doesn't like them or you enjoy going to the park or something like that and the other person absolutely hates it  ,   do you follow me  ?  
mhm yes
that's why  ,   at least they
but  ,   you have to be careful too because sometimes  ,   if you  ,   for example personally meet someone from the Internet  ,   you
yes  ,   oh  ,   yes
many times  ,   yes
they have bad intentions
some people  ,   you don't even know how they are
They have bad intentions bad intentions and you  ,   they say things that are not true  .  
yes  ,   that's right
do you understand  ,   but  ,   oh  ,   but at least you have their picture in the internet  .  
And they are ten  ,   fifteen years older now  ,   or even twenty years older and they show you the pictures of when they were twenty years younger  .  
Do you understand  ,   when you meet them in person  ,   they are a bit fatter and stuff like that  ,   do you understand  ?  
yes  ,   sometimes  ,   many times  ,   it's dangerous to solve
well  ,   oh  ,   oh  ,   there's danger in everything  ,   what can I say  .  
but sometimes  ,   there's more than in other parts  ,   in other parts  ,   do you understand  ?   You have to be careful  ,   you are not close to the  ,   hurricane Rita and all that  ?  
the hurricane  ,   n o  ,   well  ,   God is great  ,   it hasn't happened here  ,   no hurricanes  ,   the first one  ,   Katrina  ,   took place in the North of Georgia  .  
aha
no  ,   it's like  ,   it caused no damage there
In the North of Georgia
yes  ,   in the North of Georgia
just a few  ,   very few  ,   but no  ,   no
um yes  ,   but the other one  ,   Rita  ,   it passed right in front of Texas  ,   so we are not outside the hurricane zone  .  
yes  ,   that's right  ,   it's been a very busy season
oh yes  ,   Katrina and Rita was more powerful than Katrina  .  
they were saying that is forming in Puerto Rico yes  ,   but they don't know why the hurricanes there start in the ocean  ,   you understand me  ?  
yes aha
then it come to land  ,   when they get to land they fall but before they do a bit of damage  .  
You have to take precautions
for  ,   I'm going to tell you something  ,   before when there were hurricanes  ,   right  ,  
yes
like my brother in Florida when they would say hurricanes there  ,   they didn't even pay attention to it  ,   okay  ,   okay But now  ,   after they saw what happened with Katrina  ,   right  ,  
Now everybody gets scared
you saw  ,   you saw the people that were getting out of Texas You saw  ,   more  ,   more than a thousand people have gotten out of Texas  ,   already  .  
mm
to  ,   to leave your home and leave  ,   now the people leave  ,   they leave  ,   eh  ,   they leave that there behind  ,   You understand me  ?  
hmm
You take the family and you go  ,   you know what I mean
yes
But hey  ,   can I tell you  ,   this is life  ,   you know  ?  
sure  ,   there's danger everywhere in this world  .  
aha  ,   yes but
yes there are different kinds of dangers  ,   it's a danger from other people or other living beings  ,   there are dangers from natural disasters  .  
Or  ,   yes  ,   this is life  ,   what can I tell you  ?    I sometimes look at nature and how the animals live and all this  ,   there's danger out there too
aha sure
for the animals and all this and if there's fire  ,   and all the things that happen  .  
hmm
that this is live in general  ,   you know  .    You have to be careful about all these things  .  
yes  ,   this is I saw the propaganda on the television always happens
ah yes  ,   yes this is what I said  ,   here in New York you see  ,   how things go everywhere  .    Going on the bus and when they go to
sure because it seems like now it's really like society has advanced so much and society has advanced so much so everything has different
I know aspirations and I know  ,   they don't find a partner very quickly  .    They don't have  ,   the postpone  ,  
yes  ,   and the thing
but now the people are
yes  ,   and  ,   the time that you
like they say career oriented
And the time that it takes to do all the things that you have to do  ,  
aha
study  ,   you have to go to the job that you do this  ,   and this  ,   and the other  ,   you understand me
mm
And also that the things that the people have changed a lot too  ,   that the people  .  
aha
they look at certain qualities that they are looking for  ,   you understand me  ?   and certain  ,   that they are looking for  ,   before they didn't do that before there was a woman and a man  ,   and that's it  ,   you know  ,   but now already
yes now like you say the people have become more picky
one is yes  ,   yes  ,   more picky exactly  ,   exactly  ,   more picky more and  ,   and they have good reason to do that  ,   understand  ?  
aha
because  ,   yes because I thought a little more picky because the thing is that at least is looking for something that is more solid  ,   more information  ,  
a foundation  ,   of the person  ,   understand  ?   not only is another person understand  ?  
mm
but you know  ,   it has certain  ,   certain things that you can look for  ,   you understand me  ?   understand that you accept and you don't accept  ,   understand me  ?   But  ,   that's the life together eh  ,  
eh  ,   how can I tell you  .  
Sure that's why I suppose that there are more of those dating those on the internet have become very popular right  ,  
Oh  ,   yeah  ,   oh yeah  .  
because people no they open their computer and there they can find can meet with other people  ,   talk with other people
yes they put  ,   put the same interest that you have  ,  
aha
And the interest that the other person has and how they say that they have something more religious  ,   they're looking for a kind of person who has more religion inside  ,   you know  ?  
hmmm hmm
They put this there  ,   things that  ,   you accept of don't accept  .    Exac  ,   and so  ,   so well  ,   it's a reason  ,   it's good  ,   you know  ?  
Are you married  ?  
I  ,   I  ,   I yes  ,   I'm married  .  
yes  ,   ah  ,   okay
I've been married for many years  ,   but ah  ,   but before I wasn't married I was divorced  ,   once  ,   and after I got married  .  
oh  ,   okay
so  ,   so even if I'm not dating right now but  ,   in the future  ,   no  ,   I don't hope to do this in the future either  .  
yes
Because I'm getting a bit older and I don't have a lot of time for any other thing  .    because I'm also married  ,   you know  ?  
sure
so  ,   I'm not looking but I observe  ,   I'm observing what I see on other places like you say  ,   an advertisement  ,   on the internet  ,   all this  .  
hmm
because there's a dating  ,   dating  ,   you know  ?  
aha
date  ,   and date and date  ,   and something like that  .    once that
yes  ,   now  ,   it's  ,   no  ,   there are many  ,   many ways to do these things  ,   no
yes  ,   yes oh well it's business  ,   it's a big business  ,   business right now  ,   you know  ,  
yes like how now it's all a business  ,   so
everything's a business  ,   and with  ,   with  ,   we are  ,   this  ,   we are in the age of information
hmm
I don't know if you've heard  ,   heard that  ,   the age of information  ,   know what I mean  ?   that you  ,   you  ,   uhm  ,   get information real quick  ,   yes
sure  ,   now everything  ,   everything
about anything  ,   anything at all you want  ,   you go to internet information
even cell phones can go to internet  ,   that way you can without having to go to your personal computer  ,   laptop  ,   whatever
yeah  ,   oh  ,   yes  ,   oh  ,   yes  ,   of course  ,   of course  ,   of cou 
now you open your phone  ,   and if you have a phone  ,   well  ,   connected to internet
not only that  ,   but you can look at the other person  ,   and you call them and they take a picture  ,   and when you're looking at the
cellular  ,   cell phone
you see
the picture is there live if you sen  you're talking  ,   right  ,   and they're showing how it looks and all that
Good evening  .  
What's your name  ?    I'm Joe  .  
My name's Carmen and I'm from Chicago  .  
What's your name  ,   sorry  ?  
My name's Carmen and I'm from Chicago  .    And you  ?  
Oh  ,   I'm from  ,   I live in Colorado  ,   but originally from Puerto Rico  .  
Well me too  ,   I'm from Puerto Rico but I live in Chicago  .  
Oh  ,   how nice  .    Have you been living there long  ?  
H  here in Chicago  ?  
yes  .  
Thirty years  .  
Wow  .  
And  .  
Do you know the topic  ,   the topic of the day  ?  
yes  ,   it has to do with the  ,   hmm  ,   the worst dates  ,   and your best dates  .    This  ,   speaking of the internet  ,   how do you find it and if you think you can find
Aha  .    Do you start or do I start  ?  
As you like  .    If you wish to start  ,   I'll listen to you  .  
some holly days without my girl
Aha
because since I have joint custody with her  ,   well  ,   mm  ,   yes  ,   when I don't have her with me I get really sad
Aha
And you  ?   Hello  ?  
Aha
yes  ,   and you  ,   what are your best and worst dates  ?  
Well   ,  the worst dates are  ,   ah  ,   when it comes  ,   ah  ,   the Mother's Day  ,   Christmas  ,   New Years Eve  ,   my mom's birthday  .   She is in Puerto Rico and I am here
yes  ,   my mom is in Puerto Rico also
And the best ones wre three years ago  ,   ah  ,   that I have spent with her  ,   ah  ,   thank God  ,   I spent Christmas  ,   New Yera's Eve and her birthday  ,   that was three years ago
Oh  ,   really  ?   How good  ,   and do you go often to Puerto Rico  ?  
Oh  ,   I have gone  ,   these last three years  ,   I have gone about two or three times a month
Oh  ,   wow
And you  ?  
MM  ,   I  ,   ah  ,   it's been too long since I last went to my little island  .   Since ninety three
Wow
yes  ,   that was the year when my father died  ,   and I haven't gone back since then
Where are you from  ?  
I was born in San Juan
Oh  ,   I'm from Arecibo  .  
From Arecibo  ,   yes I have  .   No  ,   I  ,   I have friends and relatives all over the island  ,   as I also have eh  ,   family in  ,   in many parts of the east coast
Aha  .  
but I don't remember having many  ,   yes some family in Chicago  .  
Oh  .  
yes  ,   I've met many friends here in Colorado that have come from there  ,   from Chicago  .  
And  ,   you like it a lot over there  ,   where is really cold in winter  ,   right  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   man  .  
yes  ,   I can imagine  .  
Here it snows but not as much as it snowed before in the eighties  ,   here it snowed that it ended I think that since the earth has been warming up more  ,   well it doesn't snow that much  .  
and  ,   well 
That's also the  ,   of  ,   ah  ,   of this time also is the bad thing the storms that we've been having like
what I went through on nine eleven  ,   now that is this season of Katrina that's also ah real bad times  .  
Horrible  ,   horrible  ,   horrible  .  
who are staying  .    They brought them to a military base because close to where I live there is
an air force base
Aha  .  
but I haven't been able to see them yet  ,   I haven't seen them because I don't know what happens when they're put they're  ,   if they go out or not  ,   well I don't know who they are
Aha  .  
But here in Chicago there came some  ,   eh  ,   I think they caught a plane and  ,   ah  ,   it was fully chartered
yes  .  
but it's been really really bad because they are having collections but
yes  .  
So it is  ,   but one day they will have to pay for their avarice
Hmm  ,   hmm  ,   hmm  .  
Aha  .  
Well yes  ,   and regarding the internet  ,   Do you connect to the internet a lot  ?  
My daughter  ,   ah  ,   connects to the internet a lot  .    I don't  ,   because I don't have time  ,   I work and I only have free time when I come home from work
Oh  ,   yes  ?    Where do you work  ?  
I'm a nanny and I work  ,   ah  ,   taking care of a man  .  
Oh  ,   and
I take care of kids in the morning and in the afternoon  ,   and after four I take care of a man until ten at nice and I've just gotten back now  .  
Wow  ,   you're a really hard worker  ,   no  ?  
yes
Wow  ,   poor thing  ,   so you don't have a lot of time to have fun  ?  
Only Saturday and Sunday  .  
Saturday and Sunday  ,   yes  .  
And how many kids do you have  ?  
I have a girl who's eighteen and a boy who's sixteen  .  
Oh  ,   wow  .  
And you  ?  
Well  ,   after being older I had my daughter  ,   so I  ,   I supposed year  ,   from my first marriage I probably would have had a son  ,   a daughter who's twenty five  .  
but my daughter is only five
Oh  ,   still a baby  .  
eh  ,   sure  ,   it's like a capacity to appreciate more the privilege of being a father  .  
I love being a dad  .  
I'm fascinated  .    Well she's here with me  ,   because her mom and I are divorced  ,   and she's with me three times a week  ,   all week
We have a really good time because we're playing right now  .  
What are you playing  ?    Barbie  ?  
Eh  ,   we play a lot of things  ,   she likes me to run her all over the house and this and  ,   yes
Aha  ,   like a horse  .  
like a horse and all this  ,   yes  .  
It's lovely  ,   she's half Mexican and half Puerto Rican  .  
Oh  ,   yes  ?  
And she's always crazy  ,   she's crazy because to know the island
Oh  ,   she doesn't know  ,   she still doesn't know Puerto Rico  .  
Oh  ,   that's good  .  
and I always look for information on something  ,   I find it on the internet  .  
It's a  ,   it's helped me a lot in many things  ,   also in the chats  ,   well I've met good people  ,   but this is to know more how to know more about
only friendship  ,   to look for a girlfriend  ,   something  ,   well I don't think that it's really ideal because on the internet it's
Aha  ,   aha  .    Dangerous  .  
and well  ,   no  ,   I don't have much confidence  ,   in fact when I thought that I could meet good people or something like that  ,   well bad things happened and disillusion  ,   and
I said  ,   no  ,   better not  .  
ah  ,   and she answered and he asked questions and she answered like she was really messed
yes  .  
and he left her in the street  ,   I don't know how he did it to  ,   how is it  ?    To steal the bank account
Don't tell me  .  
My God  .  
Wow  ,   wow  .  
An  ,   it's that she gave too much information  .  
and he said that  ,   that he had a good job  ,   that this  ,   other  ,   that he was rich and she told him too that she had money
and when  ,   all of a sudden she was blinded by everything that he said and he left her in the street  .  
You see  ?  
This is terrible  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
For the
No  ,   and I prefer to meet the person  ,   there in front and
Aha  .  
No  ,   this no
You don't know if  ,   especially us  ,   as women  ,   we're not  ,   we don't know if we're dealing with a rapist  ,   with a killer
Exactly  .  
Aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   and
Ah sure  ,   I  ,   I have a lot  ,   I like the internet a lot in the informative sense  ,   and it's educational and that but in many things like that I take the body
E 
and even if I've tried a group of Puerto Ricans and
Hmm  .  
Aha  .  
it's good  ,   but when you're in one of them alone  ,   one to one
Aha  .  
No  ,   it's a danger too  .  
yes  .  
Aha  .  
Aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  .  
Aha  ,   aha  .  
I always like to talk a lot about my daughter  .   I love her very much  .  
Aha  .   And where did you meet your wife  ?  
so  ,   I met her in a park  ,   I used to play volley ball a lot
Aha
I used to play  ,   so she saw me playing in the park  ,   we introduced each other  ,   then we went out  ,   we became good friends and finally decided to marry
And were you married for a long time  ?  
No  ,   not really  ,   she had a very strong temperament and I am the opposite  ,   I hate fights and arguments
Aha
I don't like those at all
Mm
so  ,   well  ,   but at least we have a good relation as parents  ,   to our daughter
Aha  ,   aha
and the girl is happy
Mhm
she never
Hello  ?  
Good evening  ,   Milgred from Connecticut  .  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   pardon  ,   what's your name  ?  
Milgred  ,   eh  ,   I live in Nortward Connecticut
Ah  ,   ok  ,   ok  ,   yes I'm Jose  .   I live in Phi
Pardon  ?  
I  ,   my name is Jose and I live in Philadelphia  .  
Oh  ,   OK
Yes  ,   yes  ,   And and I  ,   I I didn't hear the topic too well then  ,   I don't know  ,   what the topic is about
The topic  ,   is if you've bought something on the computer  ,   and the companies that call you offering products and things  .  
Ah
that offer you trips  ,   and offer you free things  ,   if you've bought something on the internet  ,   of there  ,   of those offers that they call you to offer you  .   That tell you that you will have
some vacations  ,   eh  ,   for such amount  ,   and is free  ,   nothing is free  ,   at the end  .  
Ah  ,   I mean  ,   and do you buy a lot of things on the Internet  ,   or no  ?  
No  ,   I don't  ,   I don't  .  
No  ?  
My daughters use it  ,   and my boyfriend uses it  ,   but not me  .  
Ah Ah  ,   no
I don't buy   I don't  ,   I don't trust the Internet too much  ,  
Ah
for me is not too
Yes I  ,   well now I've already started buying lots of textbooks  ,   on  ,   on the computer And  ,   yes for me it has worked  ,   it has worked out very well  .  
Oh
And then I bought it on the Internet  ,   for  ,   like fifty dollars
Yes  ,   my boyfriend has bought equipments of  ,   he is a  DJ and has bought light equipments  ,   and music system equipments  ,   but I don't  ,   I don't use it  .   My
Ah no
I don't feel like too safe  ,   in information  ,   especially when they ask  ,   family name  ,   and all that nonsense no  ,   I don't like it
Yes  ,   no  ,  
and  ,   and the PIN card names  ,   that I don't like  .  
Yeah
It seems to me that someone might say  ,   look  ,   I'm going to get in here  ,   here in one of those companies' networks  .  
Hmm  ,   yes yes  ,   this
And he stole millions  ,   millions of dollars  .  
yes  ,   it's true  ,   it's true  .    Yes  ,   everything has its
Ah
But I especially  ,   I don't use it  .  
and it turns out that the person to whom she bought it was illegal  ,   it was an illegal activity  ,   right  ?   so she sent me the check  ,   but she never sent me the
the computer
And here also  ,   a man bought a car  ,   and he gave  ,   he was asked five thousand dollars in advance
Aha
advance  ,   so he sent the five thousand dollars  ,   and he never saw the car  ,   the guy didn't exist  ,   the company
Oh  ,   oh
There was nothing at all  ,   he went to the place where it was supposed to be  ,   he went there with the police
Oh
when they arrived to the place  ,   it was empty  ,   absolutely empty  ,   it was the right address but it had never been occupied by that person
Oh
So he was swindled  ,   and lost five thousand dollars  .   So  ,   that's why
No  ,   that's sad  ,   because just figure  ,   loosing five thousand dollars like that  ,   right  ?  
yes Hmm mm
it's hard
Five thousand dollars that you know you won't recover  ,   because if you send a money order  ,   once it has been cahsed  ,   how can you find that person  ?  
yes yes  .   No  ,   what happened to my mother  ,   is that she saw the person  ,   and then she called the police  ,  
of  ,   of the State  ,   and also to the local  ,   she called all the polices and the FBI also  ,   of course  ,   but she said 'with so many cases they have to deal with  .    .  '
So  ,   the FBI won't be getting into a case like that  ,   where it's about five hundred dollars  ,   and  ,   uh  ,   nothing important  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   so  ,   the FBI didn't go in  ,   but the local police
went to see the  ,   uh  ,   the person and then i imagine they threatened him ¿right  ?    ,   so they told him "look  ,   if you give back the stolen money to everyone"  ,   because that was
uh  ,   that was a theft that included maybe ten people  ,   fifteen people  ,   because he said he had several computers for sale
And it was the same one  ,   that he was selling to everyone
Right  ?    ,   i think it's a computer that didn't existed  .   I mean  ,   yes  ,   he said  ,   he said something like "i have six computers"  ,   and the truth  ,   so  ,   everyone thought the price was great  ,   there are several
that bought  ,   and he received the checks and cashed them and never sent anything  ,   but yeah  ,   hu  ,   my mom called the police and
she hoped that  ,   they got there at seven a  .  m  .   and i imagine  ,   i imagine they gave him a pretty rough talk
Yeah  ,   right  ?  
Right  ?    ,   that was only a miracle because  ,   uh  ,   and the thing is that that man didn't do it right  ,   because  ,   uh  ,   ebay had all of his personal information
right  ,   and there's
Those are the  ,   the half dumb ones that  ,   like i say  ,   the half dumb burglars
No  ,   no  ,   no  ,   that's a
They give you all the information and they don't know they're going to catch them later  ,   fools
Right  .   No  ,   he was an ignorant here too  .   Of course  ,   mom was very lucky  ,   she didn't suffer
I was sent a letter saying that  ,   obviously  ,    I wrote to them and told them I was interested in applying for their university so please send information  ,   right  ?  
So  ,   all they knew about me was  ,   I don't know  ,   my name  ,   my e mail  ,   birth date
Yes  ,   that's why they ask for all your personal data  ,   and they use it to make it naughty
Yes  ,   no  ,   no  .   Yes  ,   but  ,   but then  ,   but they didn't have aything  ,   nor the social security number or anything  ,   and then they sent me a letter saying that
oh  ,   there was a hacker who entered  ,   who got in thir system and stole all the information  .   So I said  ,   luckily  ,  
no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   it was nothing important  ,   really
Oh my goodness
So  ,   it's dangerous  .   I think that  ,   it seems to me that it will be a problem in the future  ,   but now  ,   the benefits are so much
No  ,   that's right
bullshit in the Internet  ,   and they have no problem
Yes  ,   that's true
And I know other people who  ,   forget it  .    ,   they are robed even the social security on the Internet
a  ,   that someone get you  ,   enters your computer  ,   and your credit card  ,   and find information about you  ,   and use it
The problem is that you  ,   for fifty years  ,   every year  ,   you take some risks
yeah
and I think that in the end  ,   the probability of that happening to you during your lifetime  ,   lets say  ,   in fifty years  ,   it really is  ,   it's pretty high  ,   really
you start using the credit cards at eighteen  ,   twenty years old  ,  
Hm mm
and between twenty and seventy years  ,  
Well  ,   but
I think that eventually  ,   something is going to happen  ,   that's true
I hope that they keep improvising  ,   the security issue  ,   for the computers because you user your PIN and they find ways to collect your PIN  .   You
That's right  .   No  ,   and criminals have a very big incentive for getting your information because
for example  ,   in computers  ,   there are lots of geniuses out there  .  
I'm Josefina  ,   Who is that  ?  
I'm Miguel Angel
Hi  ,   Miguel Angel  ,   How are you  ?  
Very well  ,   very well  ,   and you  ,   Josefina  ?   where are you  ?  
Here in Philadelphia  ,   do you remember that we spoke and that
Ah  ,   fina
That you were at University yes  ,  
Hi  ,   how are you  ?    ,   ah It's that you said Josefina  ,   sure  ,   and for a moment I didn't  ,   hi what a coincidence no  ,   tho have met again  ,   that's good
Oy  ,   what truth  ,   what a thing  ,   strange
what joy  ,   yes
that's good  ,   yes  ,   would you do me a favor and explain to me  ,   what did that man said because I didn't understand a thing
Look I didn't understand very well either  ,   but I think I think that it had to  ,   it has to do with tele sales I mean
oh  ,  
With that that they call you on the phone and they want to sell something
aha ah  ,   OK  ,   because he says something
yes  ,  
That if you have something by phone or through the Internet
yes  ,   yes  ,  
And it must be if you have bought things  ,   no
yes  ,   yes  ,   I imagine  ,   exactly  ,   I imagine it has to do with
or if they've sold it
Long distance shopping I mean  ,   well  ,   through the telephone  ,   no
Sure
or through the Internet  ,   because of all of that  ,   so
Oh  ,   well  ,   I've bought  ,   I have  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   things like
yes  ,   but through the Internet or through the phone  ?  
Well  ,   I  ,   in and  ,   oh  ,   ebay  ,   do you know about ebay
yes  ,   sure  ,   ebay  ,   yes  ,   yes
aha  ,   I bought a book
mhm  ,   mhm
yes  ,   I bought  ,   I've bought several things
A Psychology one
I mean  ,   no  ,   I believe it was for work  ,   sometimes you
I mean  ,   it was a psychotherapy book
aha  ,   something like that  ,   we were taking some courses
aha
oh  ,   they asked us to read some articles  ,   so
I see
You can find that book at thirty five dollars but I got it there in two dollars  .  
Look  ,   you know
And  ,  
Do you know this website  ,   it's called  ,   the one that you use to  look for used books
A D O L
No  ,   A   D   D   A   L   L  ,   add all
oh  ,   yes
Do you know it  ?  
No  ,   no  ,   I hadn't seen that one
Well  ,   write it down  ,   it's three w's
aha
dot A   D  D   A   L   L
aha
add all dot com
that's good  ,   okay
So  ,   in this website you can search  ,   so  ,   what it does is that it searches in all the  ,   all the bookstores that sell <foreign lang="English" online <foreign used books
mhm
they look for the book  ,   the place with the lower price
oh  ,   cool
I mean  ,   they look it up for you
well
She looks  ,   she looks in all these bookstores on line
she looks and does the search and tells you the result
Sure  ,   she does the search for you then she looks looks in a few bookstores
ah  ,  
In the second bookstores online and  ,   and she gives you a list ordered  ,   from cheaper to more expensive
ah  ,   wow
And then she takes out the cheapest one  ,   that's very good I
that's good
I've bought a lot of things like that  ,   because later of course what it does it redirects you to the web page of wherever  ,   for example
If it finds that the cheapest price is in amazon  ,   well you click on  ,   on the cheapest ones it sends you directly to
ah  ,  
to the book tab on amazon and well you already bought it through amazon  ,   you know
but it's always through the internet I mean is not that you go and then they tell you then you go to
No  ,   no  ,   is always by Internet  ,   I mean is always online sale
mm  ,   okay
yes  ,   because sure those are used books and I think that it only has books  ,   sales of used books through the internet and of course is an online store
It doesn't physically exist  ,   sure  .  
mm ah  ,   okay  ,   I've ordered books
So
like that  ,   here locally  ,   ah ah  ,  
yes  ,  
No  ,   they sent it to me by mail
yes  ,   I saw all the manuals of  ,   of
but not for
professionals  ,   you know  ,   the Psychology  ,   psychiatry manuals  ,   all technical books you know
yes  ,   aha
And these books are really expensive because sure  ,   they come out  ,   they have a very short run  .    And sure  ,   to earn money the publisher makes them really expensive  ,   like a book can cose you one hundred and fifty dollars
yes  ,   true
really easily  .    And this is expensive  ,   this is rip off  ,   it takes the skin off your back paying this money for a book that's about one hundred pages
yes  ,   and what did you do with your computer from here  ,   you bought it here  ,   or you brought it
I bought it here  .    I bought it here because this is something I had  ,   that I didn't know what to do  ,   to buy it in Spain or buy it here
a plan
But I bought it on sale and look  ,   if it breaks
hmm
Where I will have to go and fix it here so I bought it here  .    Well  ,   it's covered by a guarantee
sure  ,  
Nevertheless  ,   if I buy it in Spain and it breaks here  ,   well  ,   it will be where I go to claim
sure  ,   so it's good
we'll see  ,   so I bought it here  ,   also you know what happened  ,   it broke twice  .    Like  ,   better that I bought it here
aha
and there was an offer so that it was in Florida and you call an eight hundred number and I don't know
aha
And I bought like that because it was a good price When it arrived it was a  ,   like a clon that they call  ,   that  ,   that had
ah  ,   yes  ,   one was yes
it was different brands  ,   I mean the keyboard was of one brand  ,   the screen was was of another brand  ,   the monitor and like that so that was like fi  ,   fi  ,   fixed
aha
and that lasted me like three months or four
that's bad
and then I called him and I called him  ,   and they changed the phone and the company didn't exist any more
I mean that they did  ,   rule
it was a tmo And then the second one  ,   now I did
sure
I boght for  ,   for the brand
sure
That there was eh  ,   also for some offers on television but it was that it's a brand and it's a warranty and all  ,  no  ,  
sure  ,   sure  ,   sure
Of three years  ,   then this one is still running  ,   but
It's good  ,   the Dell too  ,   they're all good  ,   Compact  ,   Dell
mhm  ,   mhm
I bought and IBM for myself because Here at Penn  ,   ther was an offer of  ,   for Penn students
ah  ,   that's good
And I bought And I paid a thousand dollars less  ,   than if I had bought it  ,   you know
Oh  ,   it worked out good for you  ,   good
with  ,   like that  ,   in the market yes  ,   it was  ,   it was  ,   well  ,   is a computer yes  ,   it cost three thousand dollars
aha
And I only paid two thousand dollars  ,   in other words I saved a thousand dollars
ah  ,   good
I saved one thousand dollars
but it still got damaged twice  ,   in one year
Okay  ,   Okay  ,   that did come out bad  ,   I think that it's come out bad and And  ,   ah  ,   well  ,   now I'll knock on wood  ,   but
But don't they send you a new one  ,   you can't say that you want a new one
But Well that's what I of course  ,   told them  ,   but they told me  ,   no  ,   no because is under warranty and then since the only thing that happens  ,   is that the hard disk came loose  ,   well we changed the disk
hard and it was fixed  ,   you know and well the truth is that ever since they did that  ,   it hasn't gotten damaged again
ah  ,   well
So  ,   yes I mean  ,   we'll see  ,   let's see  ,   I knock on wood already everywhere  ,  
yes  ,   you need it
That it doesn't break again  ,   because if it breaks again  ,   I already don't know what I'm going to have to do to it  ,   I'm going to have to send it to hell
Sure
So
And how have you felt these days  ?   are you okay  ?  
Fine  ,   I'm very good  ,   with a lot of work in the laboratory And well  ,   without commissions  ,   that haven't coming out yet  ,   but well
The what  ?   hello  ,  
Ah  ,   I haven't told you no  ,   that I'm doing the
ah  ?  
I haven't
That you are what  ?   pardon
I'm doing the  ,   Doctorate
yes  ,   yes  .  
But  ,   but  ,   I didn't tell you that it was in chemistry
Ah  ,   in chemistry No  ,   I didn't know  ,   I thought you were talking of psychology
Yes  ,   no  ,   is that  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   is that
and this
Is that I studied sociology and I finished it
ah  ,  
But  ,   but then I studied chemistry also
oh  ,   and now you are doing a doctorate  ,   in Chemistry
And now I'm doing a doctorate in organic chemistry
ah  ,   and you are looking to work in what area  ?   or in what  ?  
mm  .   I would like to do something related to medicines
sure  ,   sure
In the pharmaceutical industry or you know
ah  ,   cool
synthesis of medication  ,   eh  ,   the development of medication and all that you know
here  ,   okay  ,   And are you doing several experiments  ?    and you say that you're hoping
Sure and well  ,   and  ,   look  ,   organic chemistry is something like cooking  ,   you know  ,   that you put it on to cook and you don't know how it will come out
Like  ,   you can have an idea but
yeah  ,   chemistry is really complicated to me always  ,   since it's not exact
Sure  ,   it's not exact
And I didn't know how to make it  ,   so  ,   so I could understand  ,   no  ,   and there
Sure  ,   no  ,   no  ,   it's  ,   it's complicated  ,   you have to  ,   you have to go in a little  ,   in chemistry's own language  ,   you know
aha
Work with it a little bit  ,   but it's true  ,   it's something a little bit strange  ,   and when you start doing experiments  ,   you realize that
that everything comes out a little in the end  ,   you know
an and after  ,   but  ,   and after it turns out well and then you say  ,   well  ,   what did I do  ,   no  ,  
Sure  ,   exactly  ,   then it turns out well and you apply it a posteriori  ,   when it comes out  ,   but when it didn't turn out no one knew  ,   you know
ah  ,   how funny  ,   no
yes  ,   like that this is  ,   it's a little tricky  ,   yes  ,   it's a little tricky
ah  ,  
But well  ,   here we are  ,   here everyone sees  ,   and we take the molecule but
and now you're  ,   eh  ,   where are you now  ,   at home  ,   in your house
Well  ,   I'm in front of the laboratory  ,   I'm in the street  ,   because I got the Fisher call in the street
oh my god
And I'm here sitting on a bench  ,   in front of  ,   of my laboratory  .  
And have a lot of people called you  ?  
Eh  ,   no this week I think that I haven't talked to anybody else because
I mean  ,   these days
I've had calls from the ones of fisher but then I haven't been able to answer them  ,   you know
ah  ,   you got in that you couldn't yes  ,  
Then No  ,   this machine would leave me a message  ,   that I couldn't understand anything And  ,   and that  ,   but no
mm I would've called you because ah  ,   since I have your phone I would say any moment I'll call him  ,   weekend and that
Ah  ,   sure you call me at any time  ,   girl if you want we can even meet or whatever you want  ,   this weekend I'm taking it off  ,   you know
mm
And I was thinking of going to the New Jersey aquarium but at the end the friend I was going with backed out  ,   you know  ,  
ah  ,   good grief
So I don't have any plans  ,   I stayed without any plans for the weekend
ah  ,   good  ,   maybe I'll  give you a call
So call me if you want You live in center city or
No  ,  no  ,   northeast Northeast in the north east
ah Northeast but is city of Philadelphia I mean
yes  ,   yes  ,  yes  ,  yes
ah  ,   good  ,   good
Have to
Or that is yesterday I was calling from the Northeast  ,   you know where I was yesterday  .  
mm  .  
at  ,   at  ,   at Haneman Hospital  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .  
Yes  ,   because a friend of mine was not well  ,   he's sick  .  
and it's oh which one of them  ,   because I believe there are severa  .  
I weant to see him at this  ,   this place is between
There's one  ,   ah  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   downtown ah  .    What happened to your friend  .    An accident or something  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?   Yes  ,   Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine
My name is Tami  .  
My name is Anni
Anni  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   from where  ?  
Ah  ,   what  ?  
Where are you calling from  ?  
I'm calling from Seattle  ,   Washington
Seattle  ,   Washington  ?  
Yes
Wow
Where are you  ?  
In Miami
Oh  ,   And how's everything over there  ?  
Fine  ,   hot as always
Okay  ,   nothing of that hurricane
No thank God  ,   this time  ,   there wasn't much  .   The last one yes  .  
blessed  ?  
With Katrina there was a lot of flooding and a lot  ,   eh  ,   many people had a lot of problems  .  
Okay
So and over there I know you don't have hurricanes but
Earth  a few earthquakes  .    And now I think that something with Mount St  .   Helen's  ,   they said that maybe something will happen again  .    I don't know what it is
I just saw it on television  ,   always something
You really have earthquakes over there  ?  
Yes  ,   every now and then  ,   but they're not that hard  .  
Wow
It's been three years since we had one that was a little bit strong  .  
Wow  .    I didn't know this
But  ,   no  ,   not all the time  .    So  ,   And what do you think about telemarketers  ?  
Not much  .    I don't like them
No  ,   no  ,   my husband and I bought this button  ,   that you  ,   when you an  answer  ,   you hear that it's them  ,   you open the button and until it says tin  ,   tin tin
the person who's there  ,   after calling  ,   doesn't answer this kind of call  .    It says it three times  .  
Wow
I say
No  ,   we  ,   eh  ,   we put ourselves on the do not call list
Aha
and you know  ,   when they call  ,   which is not much eh  ,   normally I always tell them  ,   you know  ,   not to call again  .   That  ,   that we are on the list  .   But we put our house phone  ,   the cellulars  ,   everything because they were even calling me on the cellular
No  ,   the only  ,   the only thing I've gotten is when they call me from the police here from where  ,   I live  .  
yes yes
But no  ,   the other day one called me  ,   and because they said they wanted me to refinance my house  ,   and told me my husband was laughing because  ,   I'm here sitting  ,   and I say
no  ,   I'm the one who rents  ,   I don't live here and he laughed Because I didn't want to talk with them  .  
I
They stay
Sometime  ,   no when they call  ,   you know  ,   they start telling me whatever  .   I don't want to get rude with them  .  
Yes  ,   aha  ,   exactly
and I hang up  .  
my husband  ,   did you take his name and if they call again  ,   we could  ,   I mean  ,   no  ,   I didn't take his name  ,   I just hung up  .  
And I say  ,   and I say  ,   who is it  ,   and she says  ,   no who I am  ,   and I say  ,   aye look at you  .    These shameless people  ,   so  ,   I thought it was someone I knew  .  
Yes
laughed because he came  ,   and looked at me  ,   and says to me  ,   how much email do you have here  .    I say eighty four  .    And I think that out of these eighty four  ,   only fifteen are
Yes
So  ,   here I will put my  ,   my blocker more  ,   higher  ,   higher  ,   so
Yes
they catch everything  ,   so it doesn't come to be  ,   because
I have three or four email addresses  .    And what I do is when I  ,   eh  ,   I'm you know  ,   for a promotion or whatever  ,  
Ah  ,   yes
And for the personal things  ,   the  ,   you know  ,   my family  ,   my friends  ,   whatever  ,   I give another  .    And the one I always give for  ,   for promotions and things like that  ,   it's the Yahoo one
Yes
I think that it was two or three weeks when I hadn't checked it  ,   and when I checked it  ,   I had two thousand something emails  .    And my husband looked at me and said  ,   well you're popular
Yes
Ah  ,   it happened to me once that a company sent me  ,   she sent me thirty six thirty six  ,   every hour  .  
wow
So I spent three days with that  .   Every once in a while  .   And I say  ,   oh God  .   Until they finally responded to the email I had sent them telling them that
And  ,   sometimes  ,   when they send me email if it's interesting you know  ,   could be  .   Like today they sent me something of
Oh
And  ,   then you know  ,   that for me  ,   to see and  ,   I realized that here  ,   you know  ,   like two or three houses from here  ,   there's one  .  
And I  ,   I received one before yesterday  ,   that surprised me because of that Yes  ,   it was from shop dot com
Hm mm
Is a magazine they have out  ,   but they sent it because see how they knew my  ,   where I lived  ,  
Hm mm
and they sent me the amber alert
Aha
that a girl had taken had brought the kids from Oregon here to Washington
Wow
I say  ,   that  ,   that does interest me  ,   because if I see  ,   if I see it  ,   I can say something  ,   but they don't send me anything else but that  .   I say  ,   well okay  .  
So  ,   And do you have kids  ?  
Ah  ,   look And is good to know about those sex offenders Because here I had one I didn't know I had one in the back part of
of my house  .   There's a street  ,   and next to the street there's a big park  .   Huge  .   And at the end of that street a lady was renting the room to a man  .  
Yeah  ,   that  ,   that's what surprised me  ,   that  ,   i put the address and we live in a community that has  ,   lets say about two hundred houses
Right
and i live in the eighty eight  ,   sorry  ,   eighty six
Right
but the number  ,   since the houses are positioned  ,   well  ,   it was number one hundred and nineteen  ,   and one hundred and twenty two
Right
And that's turning on the curve  ,   from here
Oh
Three or four houses  ,   you know
Uh huh
From here  ,   but my little girl hasn't  ,   you know  ,   she doesn't  ,   she doesn't go out alone  ,   because she's very little  .  
Yes  ,   and  ,   and  ,   i don't know  ,   i  ,   you know  ,   that  ,   that always  ,   it annoys me a lot  ,   well  ,   ¿who doesn't  ?  
Hm mm
I mean  ,   I  ,   I used to be a teacher and I used to  ,   I used to have a student that had had a similar problem  ,   you know  ,   he was abused or whatever  .  
Aha  ,   yes
And it was quite hard  ,   you know  ,   for me  ,   for me  ,   and for him too  .   Of course  ,   it was harder for him but
Aha
you know  ,   as his teacher  ,   you never know how
how to  ,   if you should touch him or talk to him because
yes  ,   or like  ,   how to treat him  ,   if the problem he has is because he can't understand what's going on or because  ,   you know  ,   for what has happened to him
hm mm
so  ,   it's a bit difficult  .  
But  ,   you know  ,   thank God  ,   you know  ,   no  ,   no  ,   it didn't happen a lot  ,   but when it did  ,   it was hard  .   But  ,   did you say that you have a fifteen year old son  ?  
Wow
But he has moved out now  .  
Oh
So  ,   I told him  ,   if you don't want to stay in school  ,   you should look for a job and so  ,   he moved out  .   If he wanted to stay in my house he had to go to school  .  
well
and he's like no mom  ,   I'll do it when I'm thirty years old and I'm like  ,   okay  ,   no problem then  .  
When he's thirty  .  
Well
Oh no  ,   but sometimes I  ,   sometimes there are some good things with telemarketing  ,   they give you information but not all the time  .   Most of the time  ,   I believe that
Hello good afternoon  .  
How are you I'm Josefina here in Philadelphia  ,   and you  ?  
Ah  ,   I'm also in Philadelphia  .  
yes
I'm Mayra  ,   yes
a nice to meet you  .  
You have been a lont time here  .  
A gosh  ,   that's good  .  
And you  ?  
oh since  ,   like fifteen years  .  
a long time ago yes
wow and how is it  ?  
well more or less this is a quiet city  ,   but  ,   nothing new  ,   nothing spectacular  ,   no  .  
And I'm still getting used to the weather  ,   in fact  .  
From yes I used to live in Mexico before  .  
So it wasn't  ,   it wasn't tropical  ,   but it wasn't as cold as here  .  
It was very different  .  
yes no  ,  
I'm already hidding  .  
And where are you from  ?  
Originally from Venezuela  .  
From where  ?  
From Venezuela  .  
at least  ,  
yes then I moved here  ,   since I had friends  ,   I kept on staying and that  ,   then my son got married here
mhm
And Yeah now I'm stuck with the grandchildren
wow  ,   that's nice  .  
oh
You too  .    You're young  ,   no  ,   you're young  ?  
yes  ,   I'm studying at the university now  ,   I just started my second year  .  
Aye how nice  .    What are you studying  ?  
Ah  ,   my God  ,   Where  ?  
so  ,   yes  ,   at Penn
at Temple  .  
at Penn
aha  ,   ah
hmm so it's a bit heavy  ,   but that's how it goes  .  
yes  ,   it will calm down  ,   hmm yes
ah  ,   and you live with your family  .  
Aha
And so my family stayed in Mexico and right now they just moved to San Antonio  ,   Texas  .    So at least they're closer  ,   I speak with them and see them and everything  .  
good grief  ,   And they haven't gotten those hurricane winds  ?  
No they haven't gotten them  ,   luckily they are very far form the coast  .  
aha
So they didn't get any of that  .  
yes yes is very bad  ,   who knows what has happened all of a sudden there's been a lot of hurricanes  .  
Besides it would be too much  ,   it ran out  .  
And then I said  ,   ah  ,   I thought it was running out in the whole city  ,   but then  ,   this morning there was  .  
no  ,   is not so much because it said two ninety eight  ,   no  .  
okay
I thought that I was going to fill it with twenty dollars but no  .  
yes  ,   how it changes  ,  
One thing with the other  .  
This also seemed to me pretty wow  ,   I say  ,   it was a tragedy there but I didn't think that it would affect the outside country so much  .  
Besides right  ,   because yeah  ,   besides winter is coming  ,   this is true  .    I didn't think about this  ,   it will be really expensive  .  
Seriously  ,   about how much do you spend on heating a month  ?  
ah  ,   I don't know if you have to pay for a whole apartment  ,   or what  .  
ah  ,   perfect  ,   this is the best  .    aha
it's the best  ,   it was good for me  ,   yes  .  
wow
on gas only  ,   and eh  ,   I was thinking that there are apartments that they rent them including gas and I say  ,   like I'm going to have to get one of those because  ,  
Well maybe  ,   maybe they'll stop doing that  ,   because is not going to be good for the  ,  
that's what I say  ,   that now everything is going to increase because  ,  
they rent like that  ,   yes
Yes one thing increases  ,   everything increases and like that I don't know  .   I don't know  ,   we are a bit disoriented because these things had never happened to us  ,   no  .  
yes
gosh  ,   but  ,   ah
And where does all your family live  ,   where does your son live for example  ?  
here in the north east
With the grandchildren  ,   Too  .  
North east in Philadelphia with his wife  ,   yes  .  
No  ,   the truth is that more or less  ,   since I don't have a car here  .  
yeah
You can get to know the city really well  .    But right now  ,   I can't well  ,   I only go in metro or in some trucks and yeah it isn't
aye God  .    Hmm
Oh
But now that the year is starting and everything's stressful and then it will start to get cold  ,   so it's not the same  .  
Oh yes  ,   And do you have many friendships  ?  
More or less  .    I've already spent two years here so at the beginning I didn't go out much  ,  
but right now I have some more people I've met more people  .    Sorry  ?  
And have you met people through this program  ?   You haven't met people from Philadelphia through this program  .  
More people well  ,   besides me
Can you hold on a moment  ,   what happened who ah  ,   Okay sorry  .  
aha
Then she's just saying hi  ,   only  .  
yes is that here  ,   well is like we share rooms  ,  
aha
and each year they practically change the person with whom you live  .  
if you go to Penns Landing there
Also  ,   But just when there are events  ,   yes I like to go  ,   I've gone a couple of times with the whole Latin community
aha Yeah  ,   a lot of people go  ,   and they do Polish and Greek and all the festivals  .  
ah well
Because well here we are all the Mexicans and the Latins well we are very united  .   That's something I like which is making my life easier also  .  
So yes  ,   this is good because when it grabs me  ,   when I miss home a lot  ,   or something  ,   well I go with them  ,   I can go and dance with them and yeah  .  
hmm there where they dance  ,   Are there many places to dance  ?  
It helps be a little  .    There aren't many  ,   I only like one  ,   I like two  .    That's pure  ,   pure salsa and pure cumbia  .  
But not more  ,   yes  ,   to Brazil  ,   I go there  ,   it's one and there's another really good one that's Havana Cafe  .    That's more like a club  .  
yes  ,   and Chestnut  ,   between Chestnut and Samsom
yes
And we love it  ,   this is really good  .  
Sorry  .  
hmm
And they always invite for breakfast there  ,   or to a party or something  ,   now they're going to have a party one of these days
yes  ,   yes  ,   there's a lot of parties  ,   we're also going rent  .    The Mexicans  ,   to have a party  ,   half backwards  ,   but for independence there  .  
Ah how nice  .  
Americans nothing more  .  
ah
yes  ,   no  .  
No
Well  ,   here they drink a lot of Corona  .  
Hmm when there's ah  ,   when I'm there at the cafe with this Hispanic espresso  ,   or mixed or whatever there is  .  
aha  ,   yes well there are many that go to Cafe Havana  .  
mm
And they always let us know  ,   well  .   That if they are going to put you know  ,   an offering that if a mass  ,   or things like that  .   At least the cultures are similar  ,   right  ,   Catholic  .  
yes and always the virgin of Guadalupe is the one we follow the most  .  
mm yes
I think that  ,   I mean we have the town and which is all for the virgin in Mexico  .  
ah yes
Is very important  .  
mhm Ah  ,   there must be  ,   I'm sure that there must be in the South or something like that there are many things
Where there are sales of  ,   of religious articules  .  
yes or yes no house of religion
But yes
And there they sell some burritos that are very good  ,   in the center  ,   at eleven
also
That I stopped to eat there in Front of Jefferson Hospital near there  ,   I don't know if  ,  
Ah  ,   yes I know  ,   no yes  .  
yes
yes is  they brought other new ones this summer  .  
ouch  ,   ouch
at the end as a miracle  ,   All the same there was very nice he gave me discounts  .  
There where
That he gave me free guacamole  ,   or some other thing for free and yeah
in front of Jefferson
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
Oh  ,   I have to go over there  ,   because it's been a while since I've gone by before because I used to live there at ten and all that but  ,  
mm
That there's also a house of a ladies' residence  ,   but after my family arrived I came here to  ,   to a house and then to an apartment  .  
And you don't go much to the city then  ,   like to Center
I
Hello  ,   eh  ,   With whom do I have the pleasure of speaking  ?  
ah  ,   with Joe  .    And what's your name  ?  
ah  ,   my name's Silvia  ,   nice to meet you  .  
yes nice to meet you
And where  ,   where are you  ?  
Philadelphia and you  ?  
ah  ,   I'm also in Philadelphia  ,   what a coincidence  .  
ah yes  ,   yes I live at Pennsylvania University  .    And where do you live  ?  
ah  ,   just  ,   just outside  ,   outside of the city  ,   yes
ah  ,   what a coincidence  .  
yes  .    And how  ,   tell me again what's your name  ?  
Joe
Joe  ,   ah  ,   very good  ,   very good
yes  ,   And what do you think of telemarketing  ?  
Look  ,   eh  ,   these telemarketers I  ,   threw them all out of the country  .  
ah yes  ,   Why  ?  
eh  ,   they're robbers and only  ,   give private business a bad name  .    Eh  ,   Believe me that I remember that when they were before congress the law
that was going to restrict them a lot and would take away a lot of business  .    They were saying that  ,   that they fulfilled an eh  ,   eh  ,   an important job  .  
No  ,   well I think that's right because
Well but we should then say  ,   they shouldn't go after anyone  ,   the prostitutes or the drug dealers  .  
Who  ?  
My aunt  .  
Oh  ,   yes
yes
ah
yes  ,   my aunt lives in Puerto Rico and she's had lots of problems since they approved that law  .  
yes  ,   no  ,   no  ,   it's been so hard for her  ,   so  ,   well  ,   sure  ,   she has a legal job  ,   it's not like she's a prostitute or a drug dealer  ,  
yes
she has a good and honorable job  ,   it's a shame  ,   really
oh
that they've eliminated it because she's  now collecting unemployment benefits and all that
unemployed
yes  ,   unemployed  ,   yes
Getting unemployment benefits  .  
because during time it has been very difficult  ,   but then if you think that  might be spam  ?  
Unfortunately spam is another  ,   so many businesses and some are good some are bad
telemarketers are those that generate more spam you try to defend but they send a lot of spam
mhm okay
most of them are private companies
mhm  ,   mhm  ,   um  ,   right  ?  
and
I think Microsoft wants to do something about all spam
and mhm
most of them send Emails
mhm
the computer has to do the job of separating spam
okay
so most of the time you have to process the information and it takes a little time
oh  ,   okay mm
so then
the problem is that they send it thousands of people
yes exactly  ,   because if you only send it to one person it does not matter
yes
yes we send thousands  ,   or perhaps millions of emails  .  
eh  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   aha
then it is troublesome already  ,   but I don't know what has happened with that
now  ,   but  ,   but nowadays the perception I have is that spamming comes more from the outside  ,   because here it is already a little more difficult
eh
that is the perception I have
yes  ,   no  ,   I don't think the filtering shall work with the spam because eh  ,   eh  ,   I think it is too complicated  ,   I think it is easier  ,   if you do something like this then you can
you can decide to get only some of the emails  ,   receiving only some emails that have a certain certification  ,   given by  ,   for instance if you have windows
you have to receive a code  ,   but that code  ,   let's say  ,   can only be achieved if they do  ,   if they process the information that needs to be processed
mhm
it is like a key  ,   right  ?    ,   that the computer needs
mm
to find  ,   then  ,   if it finds the key  ,   you get the email  ,   otherwise you know automatically that it is spam
mhm mhm mm
I think so  ,   but obviously it won't bw that esay if it hasn't been done yet
mhm  ,   mhm
but
yes  ,   yes
yes because the filtering doesn't  ,   doesn't work  ,   it is too complicated because
yes
because  ,   because there are so many  ,   probably that is the problem too  ,   if there is a company who  sends advertising because I for instance get them
of a company  ,   here in the States  ,   travel which is a travel agency
mm
and  ,   and they send emails every two weeks of  ,   of all the rebates they have
aha
and eh  ,   I'm interested in receiving them because that's something that really interests me because that eh out of curiosity  ,   what they have right
aha
but eh  ,   but for that company it would make it very hard if one gets a system like that  ,   it would be very problematic for them  ,   right
yes that is true  ,   mm  ,   mm
yes then just all how they say mass mail would be hard for them  ,   but that's the least I say  ,   I think that's the least  .  
mm  ,   now but I was talking the other day
because spam they say that
with a lady in Chicago that she was very proudly telling me  ,   because when the telemarketers call here I tell them so and so is not here  ,   or call her back at such time  .  
aha
and one says  ,   but because she  ,   she is really proud  ,   of how she cons them  ,   but eh  ,   I say  ,   but how is it that this lady hasn't realized
that  ,   that with these people that call on the phone  ,   what you have to do is  ,   just  ,   not answer  ,   hang up the phone without talking to them  ,   or not answer  ,  
and  ,   and it was a shame because the call got disconnected and I was going to tell her about the service system from the company that I have  ,  
mm
where eh if a per  when they call eh  ,   it doesn't let calls go through that don't identify the company  .  
Oh  ,   yes
the  ,   a land line  ,   it's just a cellphone and  ,   uh  ,   well the telemarketers have never called me
i don't know  ,   maybe there's no law for that
i don't know
there must not be a law  ,   because i remember that with the fax  ,   they passed a law that they couldn't send unsolicited material  ,   uh  ,   over the fax
Uh
And it was because people used your paper
uh
I imagine this happens in an era where the faxes still had thermal paper  .  
is
eh  ,   it was more expensive and more problematic
hmm
eh  ,   and  ,   and because of that is that the  ,   the companies receive very few commercial faxes and  ,   and it is against the law that eh  ,   you can take them to court and sue them because of that I read about that once
hmm yes well with my cell phone I think it is because I have never  ,   I never give my cell number yes eh  ,   for
well but you never give your number and the telemarketers find it
no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   well that is surely because if you have a  ,   a credit card you give your telephone number  ,  
the credit card has it then the  ,   maybe the credit card company belongs to a company that has a bank  ,   then the bank has the name then the bank call or maybe
yes
somehow they get the number  ,  get the number but
I remember the credit cards I gave them a wrong number on purpose  .  
hmm
and one time  ,   they told me I told them i gave them a wrong number on purpose because you instead of use it properly  ,   only use it
hmm
to call you if there is a problem with my credit card you use it for a lot of commercial things and even you sell it to whoever wants to buy it  .  
hello
Good evening
Good evening  ,   How are you today  ?  
Good thank you  ,   I'm Josefina in Philadelphia  ,   and you  ?  
Eh  ,   eh  ,   New York
Oh  ,   New Yourk  ,   And your name  ?  
Ernestina
Ernestina  ,   I'm Josefina  ,   we're in the ina
Josefina  ?  
Yes
Oh  ,   OK
Nice to meet you
aha  ,   And how are you today  ?  
Good thank you because the weather is nice today  .  
Yeah really
that's true
aha
Ah yes everything is quieter it looks no  .  
Yeah
The co  the hurricanes have stayed a bit quieter  .   That really was terrifying
yeah  ,   do you have a  ,   do you have a problem with telemarketing  ?  
No  ,   well  ,   they do call me all the time to sell me things
um hu
or to ask about things
aha
You must get those calls too  .  
Yes  ,   every day
Oh my god  ,   really  ,   how is that possible  .  
yeah
It's pretty annoying oh
My baby is here  .  
Who  ?  
My  ,   my baby
Oh  ,   really
aha
Who is it  ?  
What  ?  
What's his name  ?  
the wide
the wide
aha  ,   I see  ,   he's now two years old
oh  ,   that's nice
he's here in my bed
that's nice  ,   is he falling asleep  .  
aha
oh
Do you  ,   do you have children  ?  
I have an older one  ,   he's married  .  
Oh  ,   how old  ,   how old  ?  
He's thirty seven
Oh
And he's married  ,   I've got two grandchildren  .  
Oh  ,   so
They are young
one more  ,   one more has  .  
oh
thirty eight years old  .  
You have a daughter  .  
aha
Really
yeah  ,   I have  ,   it's not that  ,   that  ,   I have two  ,   two boys
Yes  ,   boys
aha  ,   and oh
And grandchildren  .  
a husband
aha
That's it  .  
that's it  .   Do you have a husband  ?  
Oh
My son was pretty young
Oh
Yes  ,   we were  ,   there were different times back then  .  
Oh
And I stayed with him until he grew up and got married
How old are you now  ?  
No  ,   u  ,   sixty
Oh yeah and me forty seven
ah  ,   you are young are  ,   young
No
Yes  ,   of course you are you have kids but big ones  ,   but you are young  .  
No
okay and did you always live in New York  ?  
Yes
your whole life  .  
Always and you  ?  
Well here in Philadelphia yes  ,   I've been fifteen years  .  
Oh yeah
Fifteen years  ,   I lived in California before  .  
and I found a job and I stayed  .  
Oh
is with my father  ,   I live with my father
Oh  ,   that is
He's old  .  
he is ninety two years old  .  
Yes  ,   he's old  ,   old  .   But he's very  ,   very good I think because
everything is good  .   Yes we are the two of us  .  
And your mom  ?  
who  ?  
mother
Oh  ,   yeah  ,   Oh boy
aha You have your family  ?   um uh family of mother and father and all  .  
wow No  ,   I don't have my family  .  
ah  ,   but are they not living  ,   or yes
No
are alive  ,   ah what a shame  ,   they are very needed  .  
you have  ,   ah
Yes  ,   one
that's good  ,   one is good  ,   at least  .  
Ah I don't have any
My sister is crazy
Why  ?   Is she in New York  ?  
She's crazy ah  ,   ah  ,   ah yeah she's fifty four years old
ah okay
And she lives alone But she's crazy  .  
Poor her  ,   why  ?   If she lives alone she's not so crazy  .   if she lives in New York neither  .   New York is big Oh my God is very big  .  
oh yeah You
New York
Oh  ,   yeah  ,   yeah  ,   Oh  ,   yeah
uh  ,   I sometimes go to
All  ,   all the people are crazy and crazy ah  ,   ah  ,   ah
um everything is nice  ,   but is big  ,   big  ,   big  ,   many people  ,   but is nice I like everything  .  
um it has but not that many many people have left because the insurance is very expensive  ,   everything is expensive  ,   so then there are people that are moving to another area  ,   I don't know  .  
We are not so
and the  ,   the rent
um
The rent
The rent  ,   better than New York
Yes is true
Yes  ,   I pay five hundred and forty
oh  ,   yeah
It's good right  .   For two  ,   two roo  two bedrooms  .  
ha
Rigth  ,   very expensive  .  
yeah that's not good  .  
yeah many people
modern  ,   over there  ,   I go to Atlantic city  ,   Don't you go to Atlantic City  ?  
yeah aha
to do some sight seeing  .  
yeah  ,   do you like Atlantic city  ?  
I like it  ,   I don't gamble  ,   but I like the sea  ,   I like the  .   The stores
Yes right
I like the nice hotels  ,   casino  ,   but I don't spend money gambling  .  
yeah
Yeah  ,   Philadelphia is like  .    So u  old  ,   no  .    All the old buildings  ,   yes  .    There's  ,   there's  .  
Where's your dad now  ?  
And we just came back  .   And so  ,   and how did you get into the program  ?    Do you have a lot of calls  ?  
No  ,   yeah  ,   yeah
Many pe  they call every day  ,   no  .  
aha  ,   ah good  .  
yes they're beginning  ,   ah  ,   because you aren't at home of course  .  
yeah And how many do you have  ?  
Ah  ,   I'm at  ,   like nine  .  
yeah  ,   me too  .  
aha
And I have met people here  ,   nice  ,   yes  ,   very nice people  .  
yeah
Ohters live in  ,   eh  ,   Florida  ,   yes Miami  .  
New York too
No first time  ,   and you  ?  
Oh my one in Colorado
aha
Philadelphia
Yes  ,   yes  .  
ah  ,   California
Today from California  .  
And you Philadelphia  ,   where in Philadelphia  ?  
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,  
aha  ,   but  ,   not New York  .  
No  ,   they still have  .   Then they call you from New York I think that they call from several different states  ,   right  ?  
yeah  ,   yeah
is nice I like it a lot because  ,   all the people are very pleasant  .  
Well about marketing They do call but I don't work much with marketing  ,   I don't do much  .   Shopping  ,   nor  ,   nor by internet ad  ,   none of that  .  
Do you buy through marketing  ?  
you talk more than before no  .  
Do you buy things by phone  ?  
No  ,   it doesn't have  ,   I don't have that on my phone
aha
but that because they call you
theres'  ,  
every day  .  
ah  ,   a problem for me
and that they want your credit card
yeah
They want to sell something that you have to pay right now and send
ah  ,   ah  ,   ah
your social security I say  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no
yeah  ,   well
No I don't know who it is  ,   I don't know  .  
yeah
What do you think of this  ,   what do you think of that  ?   What would you like  ?   I don't know  .   A lot of questions
yeah
But it's better to be private your  ,   your
aha  ,   aye  ,   aye  ,   aye
Your personal things
aha  ,   many questions every day  ,   aye  ,   aye
Good evening  ,   I'm Joe
Hola  ,   Good evening
Good evening  .   How are you  ?   What's your name  ?  
Fine  ,   Manuel
Manuel
yes
How are you Manuel  ?  
eh  ,   good
Where do you call from  ?  
From Chicago  ,   Illinois  .  
Chicago  ,   I live here in Colorado  ,   Denver  ,   Colorado  .  
okay
Hm  ,   how he explains the topis  ,   sometimes confusing what he tries to say  ,   but I think he is talking  ,   about marketing topic  .   And as they do in several ways on the phone  .  
Electronic  ,   I don't know how much  ,   they bother you with calls or emails about that
oh yes
yes  ,   please  ,   talk
Oh  ,   yes by by phone  ,   not much but I do receive by mail  ,   several times I'm receiving only offers  ,   and a lot of things  ,   a lot of things I do see  ,   a lot of things I'm just only
well I ignore them  ,   they are thing I'm not interested in
The same happens to me  ,   they used to call my phone before a lot  ,   but with my private phone  ,   but because a new law started here in Colorado  ,   almost don't
the telemarketers don't bother on the phone  ,   but they do on internet  ,   I receive a lot of emails requesting for business  ,   and things like that  .   And sometimes when I answer one of those emails I receive like ten more like that  .  
yes I try to avoid them as much as I can  ,   some things do interest me but  ,   I'm very careful  ,   about what email I open nowadays  .   And  ,   and do you go on the Internet a lot  ?  
yes  ,   you have a family  ,   how nice  .  
And how are things there in Chicago  ?  
eh  ,   they're fine  .  
No it's cool  ,   is like  ,   I don't know like fifty five  .   It was raining everywhere  ,   the majority of the day  ,   in the morning was fine  .  
Here today was really nice  ,   a bit sunny and pleasant  .   But already  ,   you can already tell that here the weather is going to start changing  ,   well here in the mountains it snows  .  
yes  ,   I was I lived  ,   I was not living  ,   working there in Nebraska two years ago  ,   well it's close to there
yes  ,   yes
And the cold is very different  ,   there is a lot  .  
um uh
And yes I don't know if I worked outside  ,   but I imagine that it will harm him when he's in that bad cold of January  .   that if  ,   how long have you been there in Chicago  ?  
I have  ,   coming to five years  .  
Five years  .  
And yes  ,   I do work outside  ,   seasonal work in construction  .  
woo  ,   And have you gotten used to it  ?  
yes yes  ,   you get used to it like with everything  .   But yes  ,   it's different to the  ,   the weather that com   ,   the com   ,   it feels here  ,   like what you feel there  ,   I tell you that I was in Nebraska  .  
yes very  .   Do you come from Mexico  ?  
And which part of Mexico  ?  
From Durango
Durango  ,   yes  ,   I've been there  ,   I have friends here from Durango  ,   I'm from Puerto Rico  .  
I've been here a long time and well here she grew  ,   was born and has grown my daughter too  .   Do you have a large family  ?  
How nice  ,   what a blessing  ,   congratulations  .   Yes I have a five year old daughter  ,   I had her when I was already older And listen  ,   then as far as the internet  ,   trying to get back to the topic  .  
Me neither  ,   I used to think before that it was a good idea but you find very strange people there that say one thing and turn out to be a different way and  .  
yes
mail  ,   since I have like two or three email addresses
yes
So they often flood me with something and I have  ,   and I spend a good while deleting the emails
yes
Is that they put one's address  ,   they sell it to other people so then one starts to receive all sorts of things  .  
no  ,   you have what you have  ,   the problem is that if you open one mail of something  ,   then they know it is an active address and they start selling it to everybody
exactly
In my job also  ,   because I use Internet a lot in my job  ,   it is a part of my job  .   Just for answering a couple of mails like these  ,   I went one week on vacations
no  ,   two weeks  ,   and when I came back I had more than five thousand emails  ,   can you imagine  ?    ,   mixed with my regular correspondence  ,   because otherwise i would have just clicked 'delete'
wow
to it altogether  ,   but I had to be careful not to delete the job mails
I know  ,   when that happened to me I had to check everything because I also had my communications with my family in Mexico
Oh  ,   yes  ,   how good
and I did it through Internet  ,   and when I wanted to see if I had a message from them  ,   well  ,   there was one from them and about forty or fifty from others that
wow
and I had to
and do you have a good communication with them  ,   this way via Internet  ?  
oh  ,   yes
How good  ,   how good
Yes  ,   I have family in Monterrey  ,   not so much in Durango  ,   most of them left already
Do you have many brothers and sisters  ?  
yes  ,   I have five
wow  ,   I had four brothers  ,   I lost one here in Colorado three years ago  .   But I keep in touch with my other brothers  ,   they live in different places
eh  ,   I keep in touch through Internet  ,   rather than telephone
oh
Sometimes I get to work and find correspondence from them  ,   saying hello and things like this
I see
That's good
It is  ,   more entretaining  ,   isn't it
yes  ,   entertaining and fun   ,   it's good to get mail from your friends all over
aha
And I have made a lot of friends year after year  ,   because I have been using Internet since the early nineties  ,   since about ninety three  ,   so
OK
I am on AOL that is one of the first ones  ,   I remember it was awfully slow in the beginning  ,   yes I remember when I started using Internet it was really slow
aha
and now with cable and internet  ,   it is much faster
I see
in fact  ,   I am studying on line  ,   and that has helped me a lot  ,   because I work full time and I have my daughter  ,   so  ,   I use the night hours  ,   early in the morning  ,   and I study
Is it easy to study on line  ?  
Well it is in the sense of time flexibility  ,   yes it is  .   About the subjects of the classes  ,   that depends on the university  ,   because
if it is hard  ,   you have to learn a lot in little time  ,   but I find that great  ,   I love it
I see
and you learn as much as if you were in a classroom  .   Because there are classes where you enter and find the teacher and other students
or the class is recorded and you can see what they talked about
OK
So there are also group projects  .   So there are classes  ,   and there is like what they call in English discussion boards wehre one discusses about a topic  ,   about topic  .  
I can finish my major because in another way it would be too difficult for me  .   Nowadays with the economy on has to work another
aha
It's  ,   it's hard  ,   I don't know how is gas over there  ,   but gas is very expensive here  .  
there is  ,   there is
there were well  ,   protests but even so nothing was fixed  .   So it was like for what it is the city of Chicago  ,   from the center towards the North
That's outrageous  .  
Now on the weekend  .  
yes
And  ,   it hasn't gone up  ,   but it will go up again  .  
Well it affects  ,   it didn't seriously affect the refinery  ,   but there in Texas there are many refineries and the did a little big of damage and this always affects
it  ,   for now  ,   we have the average is around two eighty seven  ,   two ninety here  .    But it can go up  ,   like you said  ,   it can go up suddenly  .  
Aye  ,   and do you have to drive a lot in the city  ?  
Hmm  ,   I drive about seventy miles to work  .  
Every day  ?  
yeah  ,   going and seventy
I was going to say that I do seventy  ,   but you beat me  .  
Hello  ?  
Hello  .    Yes  ?  
With whom am I speaking  ?  
Sammy  .  
Oh  ,   Sabby  ,   it's Alex  ,   again  ,   here  ,   from Los Angeles  .  
Oh  .    Hello Alex  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  .    And you  ?  
Fine here  .  
I think that the were talking about when you go out  ,   when they call you at home saying if you want to buy magazines of things like that or you
O 
or in your email when they send you un  unwanted things that they want to sell you  ,   things that you didn't ask for  .  
Well  ,   ah  ,   sometimes there are good deals  ,   but other times it's annoying
yes  .    It's pre  sometimes what comes here  ,   in  ,   in my email comes pretty close to my house and other things that
that you don't owe
They charge you for the application  ,   they charge you for the manual and a bunch of things
No and also they charge you expensive  .  
Then what I do more than anything  ,   I have ah ah  ,   like a voice mail Right  ,   like a  ,   a device that shows the phone
Aha  .  
Oh  ,   so  ,   what I have here is that when a call comes out that I know is one of those telemarketing ones or if I hear it
I have a  ,   a thing here connected with the phone that I press and once it comes out it starts to do tin  ,   tin  ,   tin
three times and says the person you call that you called doesn't answer this types of calls it says it three times well yes is like that  ,   annoying if you hear it like that
yes  .  
yes  ,   and  ,   and I  ,   I also  ,   I was on  ,   on the other side  ,   I've done telemarketing and ten or fifteen years ago it was more
easy because the people were not so well prepared
Mm
but nowadays is very hard
yes  ,   also
Ah  .  
I had a recruiter here at my door that surprised me  .    They knocked at my door  .  
And and was he telemarketing  ?  
Until you have to hang up on them  .  
Yes  ,   many times it's  ,   it's like a trick because they want something from you  ,   they want to steal something from you like I don't know  ,   your identification or something and its not legitimate  .  
Aha  .  
Hhm  .  
Ah  ,   telemarketing eh is dying  .    Your opinion  .  
But eh
e
That's where the trick lies  ,   a lot of times  ,   there are companies that are not legitimate that say they are collecting money for the police  ,   the firefighters  .  
when I  ,   when I do this  ,   I
They're lying to you  .  
I ask  ,   I ask  ,   what's it called  ?    the number of the  ,   what's it called  ?    Because when they get  ,   when they  ,   when you give them a donation
they give you the telephone number  ,   the telephone number of  ,   I don't remember what it's called and you can find out if
they're legal or not
Ah  .  
when they're nonprofit  ,   nonprofit organizations they can give you the number that they have because I do this with the
yes  .  
And there are also groups  ,   especially when there are hurricanes  .  
I heard this  ,   there are cheating groups who  ,   they call you to  ,   to send them money
yes  .  
This is what I heard  ,   I heard that they had caught three people over there in California doing this  .  
yes  ,   I know  .  
But name
They were putting everything in the pocket  .  
how bad  ,   ah taking advantage of other people is the worst the people  ,   for them to get money  .  
and  ,   ah and ah  ,   the elderly  ,   of course they gave money because they didn't know  .  
yes  .   No  ,   and even legitimate companies and for example I had to pay a telephone bill this week
Aha  .  
and  ,   is uh I only had to pay the minimum and the person that was doing the telemarketing for the telephone company
was threatening saying that this was going to happen that why didn't I pay more and then I told her  ,   you know what lady  ?   I only called to pay the
minimum  ,   here it says in the letter and with that the phone is not cut off  ,  
That is
please don't threaten me  ,   just accept the payment and that's it  .  
Ah God  .  
And I say well  .  
to go get your car and like you  ,   like you were telling me I was paying it on the phone
Mhm
and he said  ,   eh  ,   I need you to pay more  ,   and I said  ,   no  ,   I will only pay this  ,   and I have fifteen days
for the other  ,   and I will pay the other in fifteen days  .   No  ,   then we will send someone to get your car
yes  ,   that  ,   that is called in English 'high pressure tactics'
Aha
Tactics to pressure people to  ,   to try to get more money
Mhm
and it is very used in telemarketing  ,   that's why it has such a bad reputation
yes  ,   because people use it
and  ,   and it is often used by legitimate companies who use it with their own costumers
Oh  ,   incredible
It is incredible  ,   yes  ,   that's why the consumer
Mm
has to be very careful with the  ,   eh  ,   with the telephone calls and you have to know your rights as a consumer
That's true  ,   because there are people who
Never  ,   eh  ,   the rule says you must never give your credit card  ,   your credit card number or you checkbook number to anybody who calls
Or your social insurance number  ,   some people do that
yes  ,   because they  ,   they will take your money from the bank
yes  ,   and I got one here  ,   one email that was supposed to be an email from my bank  ,   say  saying that I needed to
that needed some information  ,   that for me to give him ah  ,   to assure him that this was my bank information  .  
And I say  ,   yes  ,   like I'm going to believe that  ,   that my bank will send me that and my husband  ,   he  ,   he  ,   is ah  ,   a computer programmer
that he got here in my computer and realized that it was going  ,   that it wasn't going directly to the bank  ,   it was going by a different place  ,   so he sent it to
I think to the  M S N and told them that this person was sending things like this  .  
Mm  .  
fighting the telemarketing by phone but it doesn't necessarily apply to the computer  .  
of telemarketing for  ,   for the person to buy things  ,   I say well  ,   well is too much too much  .   They get bothered anyways is like  ,   no  ,   like
Exactly  .  
Ah  ,   I think they made some new laws that  ,   that you can't ah  ,   you can't call people that don't want to be bothered
yes  ,   I think that you get  ,   you have to get on a list
and yes  .    and eh  ,   and it also applies to the computer and also to the telephone  .    For both  .  
or the satellite too
Aha  .    In the directory
parabolic
This was  ,   so I decided to call and get my satellite  .  
to wring money out of you  .  
Hmmm  .  
So
And many of these telemarketing sites also have bad working conditions  ,   they're horrible places to work and are  ,   and they work like the  ,   with
under high pressure  .  
So if they pressure their employees  ,   they will also pressure the consumers  .  
yes  ,   because the bosses in those companies are people who only want to earn money  ,   but in an illegitimately  way  ,   not in way that is
legitimate then everything is based on  ,   taking your money the way they can
Hello  ?  
Hello  .  
Hello  .    With whom do I have the pleasure of speaking  ?  
Well  ,   I'm Hilaya  ,   from Philadelphia  .  
Um  ,   great  ,   great  .    Well  ,   so  ,   the topic was  ,   well  ,   telemarketing  ,   and spam  .    No  ?    From what I understood  .  
yes  ,   yes  .    What do you think of all this  ?  
Well  ,   it  ,   it bothers me  ,   above all  ,   the spam in the e mail  .    No  ?    In the  ,   in the e mail  .    Because  ,   well  ,   I work on the computer a lot  ,   and  ,  
I receive a lot of information via email  ,   and every day I get a lot of unsolicited mail No  ?    Ads  ,   from  ,   I don't know  ,   who want to sell you clocks  ,   or want to cheat you directly  ,   and this bothers me a lot  .  
Aha  ,   hmm  .  
Like  ,   in this sense  ,   I'm calmer  .  
Aha  .    And where do you come from  ?  
Ah  ,   how interesting  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   And you  ?  
Ah  .  
oh  ,   yes  ?  
yes yes I really like Spain  .  
Me too
yes  ,   oh yes  ,   I  ,   nowadays  ,   oh  ,   they are so bothersome but with time  ,   you do  ,   one does  ,   you get protected  .  
Oh  ,   to me  ,   in the past  ,   I'd get lots of calls like everybody else but here  ,   here in this phone service  ,   they have a service in which you can  ,   just
most of people don't even know it exists  ,   in which  ,   in fact  ,   it's like a filter that blocks unwanted calls  .  
Mhm  .   Oh  ,   yes  ,   that does exist  ?   oh  ,   I didn't know  .  
Oh  ,   I see  ,   I see  ,    I see  .  
so  ,   to me  ,   if they call me and say this person is calling you do you want to take the call or not  ?  
I understand
But it's not for the  ,   oh  ,   I don't mind  ,   if I'm going to the telephone I don't care who it is  ,   what stops it is that
these companies usually do everything through machines  .  
Because they don't know how to answer  .  
Sure  ,   sure  ,   sure  .  
Mm  ,   no  ,   that's a smart system  .   Because  ,   you don't lose calls that could be important  .   But  ,  
but yes  ,   exactly  ,   eh  ,   what gets me mad  ,   is when the machine comes out  .   Right  ?   Because  ,   if a person comes out and you can argue  ,   well  ,   you can still tell them something  ,   but when the machine comes out  ,   is very annoying  ,   really  .  
And  ,   and is not the person who dials the numbers  ,  
Mm  ,   mm
but a machine that dials the number  .   And  ,   and then  ,   when there's someone available  ,   then they get on the phone to talk  .  
Mm  .   Sure  .   Sure  ,   and  ,   and do you get a lot of advertising through the mail  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   because you throw that away and that's it  ,   right  ?   mm  ,   mm
yes  ,   you throw it away and  ,   done  ,   yes  .   Um  ,   eh  ,   the others  ,   the others are more annoying  .   As far as spam  ,   what one ends up doing  ,  
yes  ,  
is difficult to avoid sending you spam  .  
its a true sin right  ?  
I wonder if anyone buys these things they offer  .  
I like to delete without reading for the time lost
I like when stopped the offers  .  
Sure  .   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   is that  ,   also  ,   since it cost absolutely nothing to send an e mail  .   And  ,   you can have an automated system that sends an email to millions of people in a second  ,  
so  ,   so  ,   sure  .   Is  ,   is hard to fight against it  ,   And  ,   also  ,   since is very easy to hide your identity in the internet and be very anonymous  ,  
go after this people legally  ,   also  ,   well  ,   is a job is  ,   is an important job right  ?   and it cost
yes  .   And  ,   what it's happening  ,   is that as they put stronger laws in the United States  ,  
they are moving the operations to other countries  .  
yes  ,  
And  ,   sure  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
And that's always going to exist  ,   countries that don't care about controlling that  .  
Mm  ,   And have you been many years here in the United States  ?  
yes  ,   I've been here many years  ,   I came as a child  ,   yes  ,   from Cuba  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   and and what part of Spain are you from  ?  
I'm from Barcelona  .  
Ah  ,   how nice  .   I was in Barcelona many years ago  ,   and I liked it a lot  .  
I have it very near right  ?   my house and  ,   and  ,   well  ,   my city  ,   a but  ,   well  .  
Aha  ,   You miss Barcelona a lot  ?  
yes  ,   well  ,   I mean  ,   I'm fine here  ,   but  ,   is not the same  .   Barcelona  .   And  ,  
Aha  .   No  ,   is not the same  .   Are you here in the university  ?  
those type of things  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   And are you a student at Penn  ?  
But  ,   well  ,   yes yes  ,   yes  .  
Um  ,   I'm doing a doctorate here  .  
Mm  ,   of linguistic  ,   precisely  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   Well  ,   I don't have it very clear what it is  .   But  ,   But  ,   of linguistic  .  
How interesting  ,   yes  .   And how  ,   eh  ,   eh  ,   Philadelphia  ,   what do you think of it  ?  
and is not that is super nice  ,   for maybe tourism  ,   but I find it pleasant  .  
And  ,   I don't know  ,   you have New York nearby  ,  
Mm  .  
Ah  ,   definitely more
ah  ,   to live  ,   and the rent and that  ,  
yes  .  
And how many years are you going to be there  ?  
Well  ,   that depends  ,   depends  ,   um  ,   they're five  ,   a doctorate program  .  
Ah  .  
Mm  .  
Well  ,   I have some friends that were in  ,   in Cuba this summer  .  
Oh  ,   and what did you think of it  ?  
Well  ,   they'd tell me that they like the country a lot  ,   that it is super beautiful  ,   really beautiful  ,   but what  ,   well  ,   they were surprised  ,   no  ?   About the lack of certain things there and
oh  ,   the lack of freedom  ,   isn't it  ?   for the people  ,   they can't do this  ,   they can't do that  ,   they treat tourists differently than their own people  ,   isn't it  ?   That there is like
Mhm  .  
even  ,   oh  ,   they even have different transportation and stuff like that  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   So  ,   what
Oh  ,   that's it  .  
well  ,   they came back  ,   they were surprised  ,   no  ?   But they really thought it was a beautiful and the people were quite nice  .   Mhm  .  
Mhm  ,   mhm  .  
the conditions under which people live there  .  
yes  ,   it's like  ,   how would you describe the current politics in Spain  ?  
Well  ,   man  ,   I'm so happy about the political change that we just had about a year ago and mm  ,   I don't know  ,   the situation was  ,   it was so tense  ,   and before the terrorist attacks  ,   it was very  ,  
it was complicated and then the terrorist attack just made it all worse  .  
The what  ?  
Oh  ,   the terrorist attacks made it all  ,   mm  ,  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   mhm  .  
I don't know  ,   they created more tension and then  ,   well  ,   the political change took place and now  ,   well  ,   the Socialists are in the government now and and I don't know  ,   I'm quite happy about that  ,   very  ,   very much  .  
I don't know  ,   the problem with the terrorism from the Basque country  ,   seems to be nearing its end  .  
What kind of solution  ?  
Well  ,   they are talking about  ,   even right now  ,   leaving the arms  ,   well  ,    I mean there is no
Oh  ,   really  ?  
serious initiative yet  ,   but it has been said that there have been conversations between the government and ETA  .   And it will probably take a long time
But  ,   at least  ,   I don't know  ,   it has been a long long time without murderers  ,   or bombs  ,   and the situation seems to be a little more
Mm
more relaxed  ,   I don't know  .   Also  ,   other measures have been taken  ,   I don't know  ,   quite  ,   mm  ,   like the gay marriage  ,   and things like this  .   I find them alright  .   So  ,   I am  ,   I am happy with
and  ,   how is the economy  ?  
of unemployed  ,   of strikers  ?  
Hello  ,  
Good night  ,  
Good night  ,   how  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine and you  ?   I'm Carmen in Chicago  ,   and you are  ?  
Oh  ,   Zulma from Texas
okay  ,   do you know today's subject  ?  
yes  ,   yes
Okay  ,   oh  ,  
oh  ,  
Should I start or should you  ?  
oh  ,   as you wish  ,   yes
okay oh  ,   I'm going to begin then
okay
Look  ,   I get calls from the company
aha
offering me discounts of five minutes of long distance calls
aha
They also call me  ,   oh  ,   who is in charge of this phone  ?   I'm supposed to be the one
aha
But I reply that I'm not at home  ,   that I'm not  ,   that the owner is not at the house  ,   that she gets back at nine in the evening so that they stop bothering me  .  
mhm
And that's it  ,   after nine o'clock in the evening I know they won't call until the next day when they start calling
ah  ,  
And oh  ,   so the next day when they start calling again  ,   well what I do is that I let the machine take the calls  .  
mhm
when I get home from work  ,   my machine is full of messages  ,   the
mm
the call identifier is full of messages oh  ,   one time  ,   a telephone company changed me to another company without my permission
oh  ,   wow
so I had a problem with them
mh
they call me sometimes  ,   so when they call me I don't pay attention to them  ,   they tell me that I have won a prize but I know where I've participated to win things  ,   so I don't listen to them
mhm  ,   mhm  ,  
I get telemarketing calls every four or five days but since I  never answer them  ,   they don't bother me
mhm  ,   didn't you put your number in the  ,   the do not call list  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   I did but they keep on calling me
really  ?  
yes  ,  
and how long  ,   how long ago did you registered your number there  ?  
so  ,   oh  ,   when the order came out saying that we could register them
aha
ah  ,   I put it
And you haven't tried to put it again  ?  
no  ,  
Because I had the same problem  ,   I
aha
ah  ,   first I just had a cellular
aha
and then I moved and my cellular didn't have good reception so I decided ah  ,   Put a phone from the house and I had the same problem and I registered my number
aha
And after thirty days nobody called me again  ,   nobody has called me again
aha ah  .   Well I already did it once  ,   this time I haven't done it but since I don't worry because the machine is what answers
aha  ,  yes
And since when  ,   an example  ,   you call me and you know that the machine answers
mm
It means that I don't want to answer the phone  ,   you are not going to call me again
mm
But they keep calling
yes  ,   yes
I also receive a lot of letters in the mail of
mm
of credit cards of subscriptions for magazine
mm
I don't pay attention to it  ,   what I do is that I break it the spam doesn't bother me because I don't use the computer for anything  .  
mm
then I asked here  ,   but yes I asked my daughter what she wanted and she said told me that she receives up to fifty spam emails
mm
And what she does is she erases it for example  ,   she ah  ,   something interest her to not have the email full
mm
then ah  ,   I also receive many letters of insurance  ,   life insurance from banks to see if I want to become a member but
yes
Since I don't answer the letters either  ,   what I do is that I shred them
mm
because I'm scared that someone will steal my identity
Sure yes  ,   because they have the address there  .  
And  ,   and things  ,   sometimes they send me things ah  ,  
mm
personal letters to me
mm
and what I do is that  ,   since it doesn't interest me  ,   I shred them really shredded because I already know two or three people eh  ,   who have had their identity stolen
aha  ,   yes
that's the very reason because what the letters do is that they break them once
mh
And there they throw them to the trash can
mh
And they are not worried that There is people smarter than one
mh
that steal their identity and then How will you do to
yes  ,   no  ,   it's a problem yes  ,   yes
To prove that you are that person
mhm
it's a lot ah  ,   danger because of that
yes  ,   I never  ,   never
OK now I will let you speak
Of all the times that they have called you  ,     have you ever decided to buy any of the products that they have offered
yes  ,   ah  ,   I have bought things ah  ,   once I bought some shoes
mhm
and they turned out to be too small and I lost the money I lost the shoes because I couldn't exchange them either
mh
But lately I have bought things like for the kitchen to cook  ,   pots
mh
ah  ,   like
But  ,   on television or on the phone  ?  
On the phone not on television  ,  
aha
No  ,  
mh ahh  ,   Well I I have never bought anything  ,   eh  ,   I mean
aha
If my phone company calls me or maybe another phone company and I didn't even understand that they had a better offer
aha
ah  ,   yes for calling long distance for example  ,   well I think that
aha
one time or another I have changed my my service but
aha
since well my number  ,   ah and they started calling me to my cell phone too
aha
ah  ,   about cruises  ,   that I had wond a trip or something like that And  ,   and I ralso registered my cell phone number in that in that list that the government has on the Internet so that they don't call you and since that moment
aha
they have not called me again  ,   so I haven't had any other porblem
oh  ,   wow  ,   aha
But  ,   but I think that the government should have eh  ,   make laws that are stricter
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha
so that  ,   they can't call the people like that because there are people that receive hundreds of calls
yes  ,  
per month and is a problem because there are many people that then have to buy  ,   like you have to buy a call  ,   a
identifier of  ,   a machine  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,  
A machine aha  ,   they have to invest money and there are people that can't invest the money in those type of things  ,   then they have to be answering the phone all the time
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   aha  .  
And there are many times that  ,   there are people that are vulnerable and that they call them and lie to them and many people fall for
ah  ,   aha
the lies and spend a lot of money
Well just yesterday they gave in the news here in Chicago a lady that they called her on the phone  ,   that she had won a trip to Puerto Rico
ah  ,   aha
And that someone was going to go to her house for her to give them one hundred dollars  ,   the person who called her told her
mm
he said look I'm going to send a guy who's like this  ,   this  ,   give him one hundred dollars he will give you some tickets  ,   the tickets to Puerto Rico
And later you have to send seven hundred dollars
mm
ah  ,   when we send you the application and she said  ,   but I haven't applied anywhere to win those tickets
mm
That if she doesn't open her eyes
Uh um
I would have lost eight hundred dollars in a heartbeat
Uh um
But the person  ,   so i said  ,   the person was saying on TV  ,   the lady said  ,   oh  ,   we have your social security number  ,   we have your address  ,   your name  ,   and she said
"¿you have my social security number  ?    ,   tell me"
Um
"i want to know where did i wrote my social security number"  ,   and when she said that  ,   the person hung up"
uh um
it was to see if the lady said "oh"  ,   my social security number is this  ,   this  ,   this
Uh huh
To  ,   to catch her
uh
but the lady was smarter  ,   she told her "¿what do you mean you have my social security number  ?    ,   tell me so i can now"
uh huh
and when she said that  ,   the person hung up
yes
that's why if you  ,   if you don't pay attention when they're talking to you on the phone  ,   you give information that they'll use it for anything
uh huh  ,   yes
You have to be very careful too
yes  ,   yes there are many people that have not been as smart as that lady and they have given information to people  ,   they have lost lots of money
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes like right now with what happened with Katrina
mhm
Well lots of people is benefitting with that money
yes  ,   mhm
because they are taking other people  ,   they take the papers to them as if they're authorised to collect money
mh mh
And because the people don't know what's going on they
mh
they give them money and when they go to ask no  ,   no  ,   we haven't sent anybody to collect money
mh
because we're receiving money in an institution and we're not sending people door to door
mh
but there's a lot  ,   ah  ,   many people that are very clever
yes  ,  
that if you don't open your eyes
mh
they  ,   they take everything away
mh
one has to know who to give one's information to and one can't be giving personal information by phone because there are lots of people that are very clever
The problem is that there are also some companies that can sell the information you give
Right
Right  ,   like  ,   uh  ,   and companies that you wouldn't think they're doing that
Right
Companies that sell products and stuff like that  ,   and when you give them your address and your social security number and all that  ,   they're valid companies  ,   but they have the right to sell that information to other companies so they can call you
but  ,   imagine that
And i think that the government should cancel that  ,   because
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   because it's very annoying when they call your phone  ,   there  ,   there  ,   there
Yes  ,   yes
and  ,   and trying to sell you things
Right  ,   um
That you  ,   that you don't want
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   it happened to me once  ,   my credit card  ,   which I've had for many years
Right
They called me and they talk about in ways you don't understand what they're saying
Right  ,   right
And i understood the told me she was going to send me a product  ,   and i would  ,   for my credit card and that i could try it for thirty days and after that  ,   if i didn't want it
Right
they would  ,   they would call me to ask if i wanted to keep the product or if i wanted to cancel it
Right
And they never called me  ,   and I thought that they'd canceled it  ,   and after they sent me the bill
aha
For the product  .    This is on my credit card  ,   and I called them  ,   and I told them that I didn't understand what they had told me
That they were going to call to ask me if I wanted to continue the service
aha
And  ,   and the told me that  ,   that they had told me really clearly  .    That I had to call to cancel the service  .  
wow
and this  ,   that like and American Express that  ,   that's a company that
aha  ,   aha
That's really established and that doesn't commit fraud but even like this when the call you and tell you so quickly
aha  ,   aha
and it's so you can't understand what they're
aha
saying  ,   and so  ,   they benefit from you not understanding
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
and there are companies who are all responsible too  ,   there are times that they do anything to keep taking money from people
aha  ,   aha
hmm
That if you're not aware
yes  ,  
Mhm
Yes  ,   one must not trust all the companies  ,   yes
Yes yes  ,   and to me  ,   this telephone company changed my company  ,   and when I received my telephone bill
Mhm
I see that it's another company  ,   and I say that the only one that is authorizaed to change my company is me  .  
Mhm
I was in Puerto Rico  ,   I was not here
Mhm
My daughter was going to pay the bill and when she told me that they changed the company  ,   she said Mom they changed your company  ,   I came  ,   when I came to Puerto Rico I went to the company and I told them
And they said that yes  ,   I had given the authorization to change companies  ,   I said how could I have given the authorization if I have
proof that I was in Puerto Rico
Mhm
And and it's supposed that you didn't  ,   that you no  ,   what is it  ?   That I don't allow anyone change my company  .  
Mhm
But they changed it  ,   I don't know how they did it but they changed my company
mhm
And also they come to me by the phone  ,   a lot of calls from Mexico  ,   from
ah  ,   yes
and I say who is making these calls to me  ,   if I don't make calls to anywhere  ,   the only
mhm
Good evening  ,   this is Joe
Good evening  ,   my name is Patrick  ,   Patrick  ,   Patrick
Patrick  ?  
yes
How are you Patrick  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Fine  ,   where are you calling from  ?  
From Albuquerque  ,   New Mexico
Oh  ,   I call from Colorado  ,   Denver Colorado  .   So  ,   the subject for tonight  ,   like they said  ,   is telemarketers and how they approach you on the phone and the internet
Do you connect the internet often  ?  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   mm  ,   specially to study  .   Oh yes  ,   to look for articles for the classes of my  ,   my
yes  ,   what are you studying  ?  
Pardon  ?  
What are you studying  ?  
Mm  ,   nutrition
Oh  ,   good
and Spanish  ,   as well
yes  .   I am also studying  .   Now I am old  ,   I keep studying  .   Mm  ,   I am studying to finish a bachelor in commercial administration
Oh  ,   that's fine  ,   that's fine
And  ,   how are things over there  ?  
Well
I haven't talked to you before  ?   I think that we had already talked or something like that  .   And I had talked with someone from  ,   from
Albuquerque not too long ago  .  
Well yes  ,   well  ,   perhaps  ,   because I've only talked one time  ,  
Just one time  ?  
one other time  .  
Oh really  ?  
yes  .  
Oh  .  
One time only  .  
And  ,   do they bother you a lot with telephone calls  ,   selling you things  ?  
Well  ,   me not so much  ,   but it does bother me a little  .  
yes
But  ,   my father  ,   well he hates people like that  .  
yes  ,   I yes  ,   I  ,   I don't like it too much because they call at bad times although here in Colorado they have stricter laws as far as that  .   If one gets on a list
they are not supposed to call you and bother you but yes in the internet  ,   they do send one a lot of things  ,   right  ?   When one I don't know if it's happened to you sometime that you've opened a correspondence
of something that sounds interesting  ,   suddenly you start getting a lot of other things  ,   of advertising things like that  .   That hasn't happened to you  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   well when you are on the Internet  ,   and
Apparently  ,   And
well  ,   yes  ,   well yes  .  
it makes you crazy when those things come So  ,   one day  ,   when I went on vacations from work  ,   because I use the internet at work  ,   it is part of my work  ,  
I was on vacations  ,   and for two weeks  ,   and when I came back I had more than four thousand five hundred emails
Four
that were
Four thousand five hundred
Four thousand five hundred  ,   yes  ,   and most of them were garbage  .  
yes  ,   it is like that  .  
Imagine that  .   And the bad thing is that I could not press delete to all as there were many important mails between the  ,   those that were garbage  .  
And I have a hard time checking them all  .  
and there
Well for example  ,   like the school  ,   for example  ,   you are always looking for economical aid  ,   so
they share
scholarship or something like that  ,   right  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   that is true  ,   also  .  
If you fill something of that  ,   suddenly many of those people share that information with other companies  .   And the it begin to appear a huge amount of things of all kinds  .  
I bought my house
yes  .  
And you do get a lot of telemarketing things in the regular mail  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   of mortgage rate  ,   like that of
yes  ,   yes  .   I had a house also and well when I got divorced  ,   well it went to my ex wife but my name is still in  ,  
in the  ,   in the system  ,   as if my name was there  .   Then I get many things like that of refinancing  ,   that if I need money  ,   I can go to this company or that
And  ,   and  ,   how long do you have to finish your career  ?  
Ah  ,   well I have like five years left  ,   also I'm going for a master  ,   in the
Ah  ,   so good  .  
in the  ,   what is it called  ,   administration  ?  
Yes
Yes  ,   or an MBA  ,   ¿right  ?  
Yes  ,   yes  ,   that's my final goal  ,   to get my MBA too  ,   and do you have good [] there  ?    ,   ¿what university are you attending there or planning to  ?  
Oh  ,   the University of New Mexico
¿Yeah  ?    ,   that's the one that
yeah
Yeah  ,   that's  ,   that's good  ,   very good  ,   and ¿do you go there physically or on the internet too  ?  
Physically now  ,   uh  ,   i have taken classes on the internet  ,   but not on this semester  ,   no
You're going only for  .    .    .   ¿how many credits are you taking right now  ?  
Right now i have like nineteen class hours  ,   i mean nineteen credits  ,   something like that  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   like
Yes
Four  ,   six classes
¿And are you taking six classes at once  ?  
Yes
Wow  ,   that's tough
Yes
And  ,   ¿do you have a family  ?  
I have a daughter
Yeah  ?    ,   me too
And i have  ,   well  ,   my parents live here too
yes  ,   but helps her a lot  ,   with the school  ,   with the time  .  
Well yes  .  
How nice  .  
they help me  ,  
What a blessing  .   It's very good that you have the help and the support of the family  .  
yes
yes  ,   my ex   .   Here I am and my daughter who's five years old and well yes  ,   she supports me a lot and I  ,   and I feel happy that she understands my  ,   the situation and
quite mature to be five years old  .   She has a lot of understanding of the issues  .  
yes  ,   is true  .   Mine  ,   mine is also five years old  ,   and is like she already knows everything and
That's how it is  .   yes  .  
But I also don't want for it to be very  ,   that she gets too involved  .  
But many people do that and like they spend the whole time in front of the computer  ,   and that's not good  .  
yes  .   Ah  ,   I work the whole day in front of a computer  ,   and  ,   hm  ,   part
Well yes  ,   if you work in that yes  .   You get home and
and  ,   no  ,   and don't want to do something else  .  
yes  .  
Ah yes  .  
I mean  ,   and later it comes out more expensive for you  .  
yes  .   And have you gotten the ones from  ,   from India  ,   that already  ,   already many  ,   many many companies have their  ,   um  ,  
 IT parm 
their telephone centers there in  ,   there in India  .   The people talk very very
very strange  ,   right  ?  
I  ,   the equipment  ,   the one I have from school Microsoft which has the  XP  ,   and has Excel and all those
yes  .  
I had problems with the application  ,   because it gave me problems with the  XP  .  
Then I called and everyone I would talk to was from India  .  
And then  ,   and with the accent very hard  ,   very hard the accent
And is very hard to understand them  ,   right  ?   yes  ,   the accent yes  .  
and I was trying to understand him and and  ,   nothing  ,   I had  ,   in a  ,   one time I was seriously like four hours on the phone so they would fix my  XP on the computer because
something was wrong with the software and I was crazy and there and after they call to see if everything was good and I told them no  ,   it wasn't good when
I have to be four hours on the phone  ,   that's not good at all  .  
It was horrible  .   I still remember that and I had to do it because it was from the school and I depend a lot on those applications working well  .  
This for the school helps me a lot  .   Then  ,   and  ,   do you use the computer a lot for school  ?   To prepare the programs and that  ?  
yes  .   More to write my trials and  ,   well some  ,   some classes  ,   like
give  ,   um  ,   exams and tests  ,   no  ,   on the computer  .   Have  ,   have you heard of  ,   of  ,   um
Webcity  ,   is like is like a  ,   some tools that the teachers use to give exams and
What is called  ,   pardon  ?  
Webcity is like a
Webcity  ?  
yes
Ah  ,   how interesting  .  
is like the  ,   the
For  ,   take those exams there  ?  
yes  ,   just think that well last semester I took a psychology class
yes  .  
and they gave me well  ,   all my  ,   my test through  ,   through the  ,   the internet
And how do you spell it  ,   the Webcity  ,   how do you say it  ?   To check it  .  
Um  WEB  S  ,   no  ,    CT  ,    CT
 F  ,    F what sorry  ?  
 C of  ,   ah  ,   horse  ,   and  T of  WEB  CT  ,   web  CT
Oh  ,   okay Eh  ,   I'm going to check it out to see but yes  ,   some yes  ,   some things  ,   for example I'm taking some  IT classes and then I have to take one of those exams  ,   and in one of those places
Ah yes
Then there I take the exams to  ,   to do the certification also  .   There that well that wants to finish their master  ,   that's wonderful  .  
yes  .  
And how long do you think it will take to finish  ?  
I I think that if I do  ,   do well and don't fail any classes well
Hello  .  
Hello  ?    Hello  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   fine  .    My name's Auria  .  
Jose  ,   where are you from  ,   Jose  ?  
From Philadelphia  .  
Ah  ,   I'm in Atlanta  .  
yes  .  
Ah  ,   and what do you do in Atlanta  ?  
Well it's really hot  .  
Well here it doesn't get cold until mid November or December sometimes the cold doesn't start  .  
Ah  ,   and a lot of humidity I imagine  ,   right  ?  
yes  .    Even if I'm used to the humidity  ,   I'm from Puerto Rico and I like humidity  .  
yes  ,   but  .    And what do you think about telemarketing and on the phone
Mm  .  
bothering  .  
I always put my home telephone number because I live in the university and that's why I never receive calls or anything so
and the thing that my mom in the house has a program through the telephone company that if someone calls from a phone that is not identified
I mean that it doesn't give its identity or number  ,   the number is blocked
yes  .  
then is perfect because my mom already hardly ever receives calls to the house number  ,   she doesn't receive calls I don't receive calls and already everyone is happy  ,   right  ?  
yes  .  
Well eh  ,   yes  ,   And and with the spam is terrible because if one gives the number  ,   one's email on the internet they eat you up there already  ,   they can throw away that address
Oh  ,   forget about that  .  
yes  ,   that's why I have more that one email account then when I'm searching for information but I don't know the website too much
Mm  .  
the spam e mail
yes  .   yes  .   And my mom also that now of of um but it was in Spanish and it was junk mail at hotmail dot com or something like that
they go from one website to another  .   looking for e mail addresses  .  
yes  .  
But at then end  ,   you haven't
But I I'm like ah  ,   like
now yes  .  
but they say that supposedly the cell phones they will jump them for the telemarketers
yes  .  
and I say to myself  .   they find many phone numbers in the phone book  .   And none of the cell phones  .   In truth they don't show up in guides  .  
Because the guides  ,   I don't think so  ,   right  ?  
before well they didn't let cell phone companies do it but I read an article that now they will let them sell it if they want  .  
But this alone companies do  .  
eh  ,   what a thing  .  
and I was financing the car through them  ,   they sold my name in a lot of companies  .  
So I saw an apartment and I received offers that were going to pay me one hundred thousand dollars for the mortgage that I have  ,   and I don't even have this  .  
that yes  ,   yes  .    No but  ,   and what company was this  ?  
Sorry  ?  
the one that sold it  .    What company was it that sold your number  ?  
Mitsubishi
What's it called  ?  
the finance company of Mitsubishi
Ah  .  
Because I financed the car through them  .   I didn't go to any other bank  .  
And later they started to but by mail at least  ,   not by calls  .   But
Uh uh  .  
yes  .  
that  .  
And since nobody else had my parent's house since I lived there  ,   well it had to have been Mitsubishi  .  
many  ,   has to respect the consumer too the
Exactly  .   That's what I say  .   The calls don't bother me so much
yes  .  
and because of that it is supposed to do it  ,   but they do not  .   And then is when they keep calling that it bothers me
But for then they have sold the number yet  .   To another person  .  
Ah  .  
And it would  .   Therefore It is like  .  
Hmm  .   Ah yes  .  
Sometimes two or three times a day  ,   call him  .  
obviously he is not interested and they could call others clients or other people that that I have a that are interested  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   but they think that eventually you can get tired of the calls and simply say yes to get out of that or something like that they think
yes
And it is like they say  ,   there is someone after all who says yes  .  
Hmm  .  
but the thing is that as I told you I worked telemarketing for two months when I was at the university and I know that it is a law that
once they tell you take me off the list and don't call me back  ,   they are supposed to do it  ,   and if they don't do it  ,   there's a fine of ten thousand dollars  .  
By the FCC
And in general the
But what happens is that no one the majority of the people don't know about that and don't know the transactions that are necessary to report the company
Mm  ,   And in general the telemarketers take the people off if
They are supposed to  ,   some do it but other companies like American Express don't do it  .  
if you tell them yes  ?   Mm  .   And your company in general did it or  ?  
The Mitsubishi company
yes  .   No  ,   no the company where you worked for telemarketing
Mm  .  
they can't say  ,   I'm not interested and hang up because they call you back  .  
yes  .  
Mm  .  
Uh uh
clients as someone that couldn't be called so and it was a database that if they bought a new list and that person already appeared in the new list
Uh uh
the database could check the name and know that they couldn't just call this person like they wanted  .  
And they put on a block  .  
Well
because I
I know that you call this toll free number and you enroll and then I suppose that they take you off all the lists
Hmm  .   But have you already been on it  ?    Has it worked well  ?  
well  ,   I don't know because like I told you I have a cell phone so I haven't had problems with telemarketers
Hmm  .  
so I haven't had to enroll  .  
but supposedly now there is going to be a toll free number for people with cell phones to enroll in too  ,   because like I said they're going to release the cell numbers  .  
I didn't know if it had turned out well of if they kept calling these people  ,   nothing in the news because much of the news
got something and so they put it on for several days and so then recently it disappeared  ,   right  .    You never see it anymore  .    So I
Hi  ,   my name is Gloria  .  
How are you  ?  
Good  ,   And you  ?  
OK  ,   I  ,   eh  ,   I really didn't understand what he said  ,   I know that we are  ,   ah  ,   suppos  to talk about telemarketing  .  
yes  ,   About telemarketing  ,   and about spam  .  
Of the  ,   eh  ,   What  ?   Of the what  ?  
Spam  .  
Oh  ,   the spam  ,   oh  ,   that's what I thi  ah  ,   OK  ,   OK  ,   OK of  ,   of the Internet  .  
yes  .   yes  .  
almost always illegal  ,   or I don't know  .  
from doing your work that you're supposed to do  .  
Anyway  ,   now you speak a bit  ,   because I don't know what to say  .  
it is one  ,   eh  ,   one of these  ,   its is Hotmail  ,   well I have several  ,   and Yahoo
Aha
and of those I have a folder
Aha
of junk mail  ,   of spam
Aha  ,   aha
and there go all the mails  ,   and honestly it has a filter that works really well  ,   Because
really  ?  
yes  ,   because there are very few spam e mails that reach the  ,   the  ,   the inbox
Oh  ,   so you have a block
Y  eh yes  .   So
A block  ,   something to block them  ,   from you
yes  ,   it filters them
Oh  ,   filters  ,   you see I have that  ,   you know  ,   I have that  .   But
yes
I can log in to my Email
I can use it because my little boy plays with the computer
Mhm
I believe that damages the computer too
well  ,   it depends what game it is  ,   but
then yes  .  
so where are you from  ?  
excuse me
yes what country are you from  ?  
From Spain  .  
Oh  ,   from Spain  ,   oh okay  .    So  ,   I'm butchering the Spanish  .    Because  ,   I'm Newyorkian  .    I was born in Puerto Rico  ,   but I grew up he 
And the  ,   the calls on  ,   hmm  ,   on the telephone  ,   to try to sell you something  ,   what do you think  ?  
but I help them  ,   you know  ,   I tell them  ,   no  ,   I'm not interested  .    So  ,   sometimes they hook you  ,   sometimes some of them and  ,   and they talk badly to you  .    But  ,  
Ah yeah  ?  
normally  ,   I talk really well to them because I  ,   I did this for a time  .    So  ,   I find that  ,   it's really hard to do this  .  
Aha  .  
and it was an interview where they explained to you what it was like  ,   and after  ,   it's a hard job  ,   really  ,   because you're there for many hours  ,  
Aha  .    Aha  .  
And there  ,   and talk with people who  ,   well  ,   who tell you they're not interested  ,  
aha  .  
Oh  .   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
to treat the  ,   the client  .   Right  ?  
Exactly  ,   one has to take everything they tell you with a  ,   with a smile  .  
You know  ,   with a smile  .   But  ,   that  ,   that job  ,   was frustrating  .   But  ,   you know what  ?   the more people you call  ,   if you have an opening  ,   like me who was calling through the insurance of  ,   of
yes  .  
it made it easier  .   Then  ,   they would talk to me  .  
But  ,   if you didn't speak Spanish  ,   like they didn't want anything to do with you  .   I don't know if it's because they didn't understand me  ,   or  ,   and I
Aha  .  
also speaks the same language  ,   like they already have something in common that  ,   that wins you over  ,   that How do you say it  ?   Ingratiates  ,   ingratiate  ,   well  ,   with the other person  ,   and
Aha  ,   aha  ,  
and that's why I think they respond better  .  
yes  ,   I think you are right  ,   yes  .   So  ,   then  ,   they would put me in the Hispanic community  ,   so  ,   each  ,   lets say that  ,   every fifty calls
yes  .  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   that's what I was wondering about because  ,  
Well  ,   I  ,   e 
I  ,   all of it  ,   everyone I talked to  ,  
aha  .  
everyone I've spoken to  ,   all of them told me that they had never bought anything or been interested in buying stuff through the phone  .  
And I was like  ,   but  ,   they must sell something  ,   right  ,   or they wouldn't get any profits
yes  ,   aha  .   They don't earn  ,   they don't because lots of those jobs are through commission  ,   you know  ,   they pay you if you sell things  .  
five hundred pesos per week  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   if I can  ,  t I'd have to get lots and lots of people  .  
Lots  ,   it was impossible  ,   and sometimes you can't sometimes  ,   the people  ,   lots of them have answering machines  .  
So  ,   it was difficult for them to call you back  ,   some wouldn't pick up the phone  ,   it was frustrating  ,   I thought it was  .  
And  ,   now I work in the school  .  
yes  ,   I know  ,   I know But  ,   it sells  ,   it sells  ,   some people are lucky  .   Is the one you have  ,   like  ,   there are many books that you can study
Ah  ,   really  ?  
Then  ,   if your voice is you know that sometimes when they call you  ,   they talk very fast  ,  
yes  ,   extremely  ,   yes  .  
sometimes they put you to sleep  ,   they put you to sleep  ,   and you buy  .   Really  .  
In other words  ,   that is the trick  ?   Because  ,   I laugh  ,   I mean  ,   but well it seems that  ,   that they know they have very little time  ,   because I'm going to hang up  ,  
and they want to say everything possible in such little time  .  
if you don't convince the client in a minute  ,   no  ,   no  ,   you  don't sell anything  .   So  ,   in that minute  ,   you have to make your  ,   your presentation  .  
Sure  ,   sure  .  
But  ,   anyway  ,   is that  ,   I think that the majority of the people  ,   don't care  ,   they are not listening  ,   really  ,   they are not even hearing  ,   what you are saying
I know  ,   I know  ,   I know  .   Because  ,   I  ,   in school  ,  
when I work in the school and the people call  ,   they already start to talk fast  .   I have this problem  ,   and I tell them  ,   wait a minute  ,   I need your name  ,  
Because  ,   at work  ,   they do call a lot  .   In the school  .  
yes  .  
And have you put your  ,   your phone on the list of  ,   on the list of  ,   that there is for
Of do not call  .  
yes  ,   you know that I worked in an agency that does that  ,   that writes the name so they don't call  ,   and they still call  .  
And  ,   they say that now  ,   they say that now  ,   they are trying to call you on the cellular  ,   that that it says it cost you a call  .  
yes  ,   sure  .   And  ,   and are they also calling the  ,   the  ?  
Cellulars  ,   yes  .   If I don't know the number  ,   I don't get it  .  
it could  ,   yes  ,   exactly  .  
So  ,   you never know  ,   you know  .  
So  ,   aha  .  
Aha  .  
Ah  ,   okay  .  
they don't charge me when they call me  .    Why are they going to charge me when the call my cell phone  ?  
Aha  .    I know  ,   I know  .    It's all this  .    If you don't read the  ,   the small things that the write in the contract  ,  
make  ,   are discounted
Uh huh
Pre paid  ,   you can pay for it upfront
yes
Anyway  ,   so i  ,   I'm trying to cook  ,   so  ,   uh
Right
¿What else  ?    ,   but i buy a lot over the internet  ,   on the internet  ,   i buy lots of stuff
Yeah  ,   but not from the e mails they send to you  ,   but when
No  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   but  ,   uh  ,   um  ,   sometimes I'm afraid  ,   you know  ,   to put your card number  ,   because you never know
Like people say
yeah  ,   you have to be careful  ,   yeah
Yes  ,   they're connected
I only put it on websites that
Right
that i trust  ,   which are few  ,   i mean
Aha  .  
no  ,   no  ,   I mean  ,   I never go to a little web page  ,   of someone that's selling something  ,   there  ,   small  .  
It scares me  ,   so  .   Because  ,   even if it's a secure transaction  ,   and the number is not lost on the Internet  ,  
Exactly  ,   yes  .   And  ,   they keep on sending you things  ,   to see if you fall  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
But  ,   well  .   And you   ?  
I am  ,   m 
David  ,   how are you  ?  
Hello  ,   fine fine fine  ,   with whom am I speaking  ?    What's your name  ?  
David  ,   yes  ,   night to meet you  ,   how are you  ?  
David  ,   Mayra  ,   nice to meet you  ,   fine  ,   where are you talking from  ?  
I'm calling from Connecticut
ah yes  ,   and where are you from  ?  
yes  ,   I'm American  ,   I was born in Brooklyn  ,   New York
seriously  ,   great  ,   you speak really well
yes
you speak really
and you  ,   where do you come from  ?  
I'm from Mexico but I'm in Philadelphia
ah yes in Philadelphia
yes I study here
oh  ,   okay  ,   are you studying in the college or are you  ?  
hmm  ,   sorry  ?  
are you in college  ?  
yes  ,   in the third year  ,   junior
yes  ,   oh you are a junior  ,   oh that's cool
now  ,   hmm  ,   and what do you do  ?  
I'm a mechanic more or less
mm okay
yes I have some friends you know my mechanics since I have a garage are Mexicans
mm
all I have like four  ,   five guys that work with me
okay mm
from your country
and like that like that   ,   where did you learn Spanish  ?  
I learned by force because since I was born here in the United States
mm
ah you know I started to speak in Spanish to tell you after seventeen years
alright okay
my parents are Puerto Rican but were born here
mm
then the Spanish that I learned is from the street more or less from my friends and from my wife who comes from Ecuador
okay  ,   okay
and like that little by little there learning the language
how nice
and what else
and I don't know what the topic today was of marketing I never understand what the recording says it's terrible
this is what I can't understand because the recording doesn't come out well  .  
yes
because I think it was telemarketing like if you're on the list or not in the list  ,   they still call or something like that but at least you know for the phone ten minutes and you don't answer
yes anyway
with  ,   with what you heard in the
the Fisher
of the  ,   eh  ,   the Fisher
so there's a  ,   I think that the main office is at the university so there I found some signs from last time
ah
that there was another experiment like two years ago and so I participated in these and then they told me that there was this one in Spanish
ah  ,   the other one was in English  ,   no  ?  
so yes they were English or in various other languages too
yes  ,   ah yes  ,   aha
so if you were someone who spoke Spanish or Chinese for example or Arabic they payed you more
oh yes
aha but that's it if you were lucky and knew someone
and this is the only band thing  ,   that they always call me when I'm eating or going to sleep
hmm yes me too  ,   this is why now I started to call  ,   I'm doing the calls when I can
ah yes
because I don't know how long it will last I think there's nothing more we can do twenty  ,   five calls  ,   no  ?    but they pay you more
and from
here like I know that while you talk more
yes
they pay you more for the calls
oh no
so aha so since I don't know how long this call has lasted  ,   better the platform
sure
and I wait for the call when I can
ah
because besides my phone is always ringing  ,   it's a tin can  ,   so I go without answering and they talk to me each half hour so better
yes but they call me  ,   they call me and when the other time when I answered the phone  ,   then I put in the pin number
hmm
and the call left
ah seriously
everything and yeah so I say  ,   okay  ,   okay  ,   ah the person said your number is this the other  ,   I said the number and they said that's it  ,   and hung up
okay how strange
yes but you know it's like it was late  ,   it was like nine thirty more or less
hmm
like the other year when they called me it was like a little white wine  ,   a Yank there who started to yell on the telephone why I was calling at night
I don't have anything to do
I I didn't call you you signed  ,   you put your name on the list and they are calling you I didn't call you then like one
mm
getting out of that list that if the other that he got so mad  ,   all mad and he hung up on me
okay well
so you know eh is how it is  ,   then how many years have you been here in the country  ?  
I've been in the country two years well I'm on my third
yes
barely and I'm living here alone in Philadelphia
ah yes  ,   wow
mm well with friends from the university
sure  ,   aha
my family was in Mexico and they just moved to Texas to San Antonio
ah yes the other time I was talking with a lady from San Antonio
mm yes  ,   there is
yes I was asking her if there is a bunch but she says that will all the people that moved from the hurricanes that passed that San Antonio is getting very bad
ah really
aha she says that a lot of fights with the people from high school
ah
with the kids from there from the
is that is must be very hard organizing everything right now
yeah it is a problem is that if you don´t see it on TV
hmm
all Latins  ,   no the people are poor and have they are very handsome and they want all for nothing you think that everone should
hmm
because they don´t have a house to live in but they knew about the storm but
yes yes yes
they stayed and that´s what happened
okay  ,   ah how good I have not could talk to
yeah Have you been here for just two years  ?  
pardon me  ?   hmm just
you have just two years here  ,   how do you like it  ?  
I like it it is fine I have not get used to the weather  ,   it is very cold
yes yes but which part  .   which part of Mexico are you from  ,   there in Mexico city
I do not understand about Mexico city then hmm then the summer is hot but not to much temperate
aha  ,   of course
and the winter is cool instead of here that summer is horrible  ,   is humid and it is very hot and after that there is cold all the time
hmm
so I have not get used but it is fine I am liking it more as times goes and know more the city and people and <I like everything more
of course  ,   ah you have to  ,  
is nothing more than nothing more than in California there is my
Uh  ,   in Miami  ,   Miami has more or less the same weather
Yes  ,   i don't know there  ,   but i think i should
Right  ,   there are great little things over there  ,   oh  ,   very cheap
Yes
And it's all Miami  ,   it's Miami University College  ,   Miami State University  ,   Miami Florida  ,   yes
Florida  ,   yes  ,   University of Florida and everything
Yeah  ,   they have everything  ,   but it's all schools  ,   so  ,   you know  ,   you have to get to know it  ,   it's very cool
you should study  ,   yes
Look  ,   if you're latino  ,   everybody speaks Spanish there  ,   everybody speaks spanish
Uh huh  ,   uh huh
So  ,   i don't know  ,   i don't know  ,   i don't
Ok  ,   OK
because everyone can communicate over the phone so  ,   what do you want to talk about  ,   i mean  ,   what do you want to talk about  ,   what do you want to talk about
well  ,   i don't  ,   know  ,   uh  ,   how long uh  ,   ¿where in Connecticut do you live  ?  
¿come again  ?    ,   I'm sorry  ,   ¿what was that  ?  
¿where do you live  ?  
I live in Connecticut  ,   uh  ,   on New Havenm i don't know if you
Oh  ,   New Haven  ,   and  ,   ¿have you always lived there  ?  
Right  ,   no  ,   i have lived  ,   i used to live in New York  ,   uh  ,   outside the Bronx  ,   more or less  ,   i lived over there by the city
Uh huh  ,   uh huh  ,   i like New York a lot too  ,   it reminds me a lot of Mexico City
then that yes  ,   ah
yes  ,   in fact and since is like that is very vibrant there's a lot of energy and everything is happening and I like to go there
yes in the city is very dangerous
mm
I mean it depends what part if you go by Manhattan  ,   Manhattan is very cool  ,   okay
yes
there are many there many people from different countries
mm
then well to casually to see the people because there are many crazy people that walk in the streets you know
yes that too eh
yes
I mean I've also been lucky because I've only been in Manhattan
yes
and once I went into the Bronx and Queens by accident but nothing happened
mm oh then you are driving or you come by bus
what  ?  
driving or in in in
no in bus
oh yes ah is cool but you know
yes
you have to know
hmm
but that that time is delayed for here for Philadelphia to Manhattan
it's only like two hours  ,   besides there's  ,   hmm  ,   there's a bus that isn't the Greyhound  ,   but the Chinese do it
yes oh yes yes yes
so you go from Chinatown to Chinatown
right  ,   right  ,   right
and it only costs ten dollars it's really cheap
oh that's not so bad then
hmm yes so many times we just go to New York every week end and yeah
oh  ,   that's coot but little by little  ,   so how is it going at school
well yes  ,   I study chemical engineering
what are you choosing  ,   oh yeah
so hmm  ,   it's a little bit heard  ,   and it's getting more difficult
yeah
I've just starting  ,   yes  ,   I'm just feeling  ,   how difficult it will be
yeah yeah but you can change your major  ,   no  ?  
yes but this is my third year
yeah
so I've been taking engineering classes and science since I entered and now well  ,   yeah better  ,   I think it's worth more to finish
ah ah  ,   but will you one are you thinking of staying here or do you return later to Mexico
I don't know I don't want to return to Mexico yet  ,   I want to return but after several years
sure
and in the United States I like it but I don't love it so I am thinking it's better to work for a couple of years or study a masters or something
m m
and then go to Europe or some other country it seems to me that it would be nicer to live in another country I don't know Australia or something like that  ,   some other thing
yes  ,   eh you know in London is the same  ,   more or less as in Manhattan  ,   London
yes  ,   yes
and it's the same as in Manhattan the the it has the same  ,   it has a Times Square  ,   you have buses eh all but you know only there is  ,   there are not so many Hispanics there
no there's not many here  ,  
it's only only whites more  ,   more or less whites and I know and English knows speak much English  ,   by force
ah well yes I say I have been here before and I did my high school in English
aha
two years so I have been speaking English for about four years
aha
and well now now I'm used to it  ,   I still have an accent and there are some words that I don't know
sure
but there's not so much difference now  ,   I'm not so bad
ah that's cool but but little by little you learn more or less
mhm  ,   yes
and the friendships  ,   you begin to practice with your friends and that way you learn the words that they are not going to teach you in school you know little by little
But it made me happy that you like the United States  ,   and you are going  ,   it's that all the young people of yours come here to work because the  ,   the Mexicans  ,   all the Mexicans that I know
they like to work very hard and save their holidays and take them to their country and then never return  .  
well if not  ,   I believe that if they return  ,   many return  ,   or they use them there and it's in relation to working more
no  ,   well  ,   it's not if  ,   but  ,   no  ,   it's not so easy to return again  .  
no  ,   it's not
so now like  ,   like we are at war  ,   eh closed the borders  ,   then the people who are here  ,   already here  ,   can't go back or else they have to stay but
it's the problem I have  ,   my friends here
mm  .  
but he does not speak English well and has his two children that were born here and just barely bought a house
okay
well he said he was going back that he has property that he has a house that he was saving money to go back and is sorry he bought his house here  .  
but doesn't want to return right now because it's not the same so
well yes  ,   but you know that if you always miss it  ,   or I mean  ,   it's not easy to live here because you work hard and live well
yes of course
or I mean  ,   even though  ,   even though you may be working in a McDonald's you can live instead in Mexico you work equally hard  ,   but enough money  ,   but you always miss it  ,   it's a very different lifestyle and I really miss the people and everything
yep  ,   no if I went  ,   I have gone to Mexico twice
mm  ,   ah okay where
yes  ,   I went to Tupulco and I went to Mexico City
okay
oh
Hello  ?  
Betsy
Hello  ?  
Ho Hello  ?  
Aha  .  
Who is it  ?  
Eh  ,   eh  ,   I'm Brenda  .  
Brenda  ?  
yes B 
I think that we talked before  ,   the  ,   the first time that I talked  .  
Aha  .  
Anyways  ,  
I didn't understand the  ,   the topic  .  
About telemarketing you mean  ?  
Something like that  ,   about telemarketing  ,   eh  ,   well
Hmmm  .  
eh  ,   buying on  ,   um  ,   the internet  ,   or on the telephone  ?  
I only heard telemarketing  .    The thing that is telemarketing
Oh  .    Hmm  .  
Hmm  .    Well yes  .  
My son works doing telemarketing
I also used to work in telemarketing  .  
then  ,   what did you use to do  ?  
he is from Virginia
yes oh
I called him once
oh  ,   okay
well  ,   yeah
My son has worked for two different companies  ,   selling magazines
Hm mm oh  ,   okay
the second time I don´t remember but he didn´t like it very much
okay
It was the company because they used to treat him like a little baby
oh  ,   okay
so there is many people
Hm mm  .  
well  ,   they try to control him
Hm mm
and you know
they try to make you sell you know in one hour you have to sell five and things like that  .  
Mm  .  
if you don't sell five  ,   because I  ,   what I did before was of newspaper  ?  
Aha  .  
And then  ,   what is it called  ,   And if you didn't sell seven per hour  ,  
Mm  .  
they would decrease the  ,   what I earned per hour  ,   oh  ,  
Mm  .  
I said  ,   mm  ,   okay  ,  
The salary  ?  
Sorry  .  
Ah  ?  
They said  ,   they say Sorry eh I don't think this job is for you  ,   or something like that  .  
Mm  .   Look  ,   is very  ,   stressful  ?  
Hm mm
There are many people that  ,   leave  ,   because of that because they can't  ,   work in that  ,   in that  ,  
In that type of job  .  
Aha  .   Because  ,   they make it too hectic  ,   and  ,   and
Yeah  .  
eh they always come with headaches  ,   and  ,   and  ,  
Aha  .  
you know  ,   and  ,   and
Yeah  ,   is true eh And there are  ,   are people that  ,   let's say  ,   in an hour can sell seven newspapers  ,   or whatever But the following hour
they are hanging up on you  ,   they curse at you  .   And they  ,   or they scream at you
Hm mm  .   Well  ,   and now  ,   is
Many times
because they said that  ,   that now  ,   eh  ,   up to a certain hour of the day  ,   they can be calling  .  
Hm mm  .  
After  ,   I think seven  ,   I don't know what time it is  ,   they can't call your house at dinner time  .  
yes  .  
Then  ,   Now they are saying of the cellular phones  .  
that  ,   that now they will be  ,   will be calling
The cellulars
Aha  .   Then  ,   there is a  ,   an internet address
that one can go to  ,   to put their number  ,   name  ,   something like that  ,   so that they don't call you  .  
A  ,   a number
But is in the United States  ,  
yes  .  
yes  .  
Hm mm  ,   well yes  .  
the stores  .   SO there's a lot of  ,   customer service  .  
for the  ,   for the people is the  ,   you know  ,   that the attitude of the customers  ,   so to speak  .  
Because I work in a store  ,   and  ,   and and sometimes  ,   I  ,   tell them something and they take it the wrong way and  ,   and they think that I am
that  that they're lying in life or something and I
Aha  .  
but it what what I said  ,   because she got mad and I don't know  ,   you know
Sorry if she got mad
eh  ,   aha  ,   you know  ,   it's that
Yeah
when they go  ,   they get mad  ,   and after they tell the manager
Hmmmm
So  ,   one time they said it  ,   and  ,   and called my attention and said  ,   but this  ,   they told me  ,   so  ,   that
Aha  .  
aha  ,   and I didn't have anything with anyone  .  
Aha  .    Aha  .  
her more than  ,   they want to find out what happened  .   But the majority of the times they are  ,   on the side of the workers  .  
Hm mm  .   Okay
Aha  .   Aha  .   Then  ,   since the customers sometimes get  ,  
they get like   ,   you were working in the store  ,   you have to find them this  ,   and you have to do this for them  ,   and you know
Aha  .  
Yeah
And then  ,   mm  ,   but here  ,   this  ,   all this  ,   customer service the majority of the things  .  
yes  ,   hm  mm
But always  ,   more or less  ,   one has to do something with the clients  .  
But
Well yes  ,   hm mm And what else did they say  ?   Shopping eh  ,   buying online  ?  
Eh  ,   eh  ,   Something like that I understood  .   Is that he  ,   since he has that strong accent  ,   I don't understand him
Aha  ,   and  ,   is true  .   I hardly understand him  .  
Don't you see  .   I know that
I know that it's the  ,   the number  ,   ah how was it  .  
No  ,   That you had to put the code  ,   and and plus the  ,   the sign of I don't know who  .  
But is the  ,   that one that's on the phone to your right  ,   on par with the zero  ,   to the right  .  
In English  .  
Ah  ?   Aha  .  
In English  ?   Okay  ,   okay in English it says it before  .  
And in English is pound  ,   you know what pound is  .  
Aha  .  
Yeah  .   Well I wait  ,   I think  ,   the number of of the  ,   okay  ,   so that has to be the number plus the pound
Okay because the first time what I did was put the star  ,   and they said no  ,   is you wrong name  ,   something like that  ,   ah my God  .  
and now that put ah  ,   it must be the other one
and aha
and it left  .  
Aha  ,   Chinese  .  
That was what he said but he does not sound like if he was Chinese  .  
It could be because you don´t understand him  .  
With the one you were talking  ,   or  ,   or with the one who is in the machine  ?  
with the one I  ,   with the one I was talking  ,   he said that  ,   that he
Oh  ,   aha  .  
Are you serious  ?  
Hmm  ,   because as  ,   well  ,   you do not understand anything  .  
Yeah  ,   it is true  .   You don´t understand what he is saying  ,   oh God  .   Yeah
So why doesn't he say it in English  .  
because and well  ,   I understand English better than Spanish  .  
So aha  .  
Aha  ,   yes  .   Press one  ,   or two or whatever  .  
Well what it is in Spanish  ,   press d  d  d  three  ,   or whatever  .  
Ah  ,   aha  .   Like that it gives the  ,   the
Aha  .   Like that it gives  ,   one the choice of  ,   of how one wants to hear it  .  
Well yes  .  
the  ,   the asterisk she said in Spanish  .    Well  ,   oh  ,   she said it like  ,   I don't know how she said it
The  the little star  .  
Uh as ast 
Aha  ,   aha
Aha  ,   I know  .    Yeah but they also say pound in English  ,   but in Spanish  .  
I didn't understand anything  .  
Wait  ,   I'm going to ask my dad  ,   let's see  .    How do you say this  ?    Ah  ,   yes  .    And the next time that  ,   maybe we talk and I'll tell you  .  
ah hello  ,   I'm Josefina here in Philadelphia  ,   how are you  ?  
I talk  we've already talked  ,   right  ?    I think that yes  ,   aha  ,   aha  ,   hmm  ,   no well good  ,   and how are you  ?  
yes  ,   right  ?    at the beginning I thought so  .    How are you  ?    Nice to meet you  .    How are  well fine here  ,   the weather is already a little cold
ah yes  ,   here it's a bit cold
it's gotten cold now  ?  
aha  ,   aha  ,   yeah it's like fifty something the temperature here
oh my  ,   yes  ,   because here it's seventy something
no  ,   no  ,   here we're at fift  at night  ,   it's fifty
ah  ,   so there is where  ,   it's  ,   is it cold there like in Chicago  ?  
yeah
ah so  ,   that's where it's crazy strong the thing
much snow
when the snow comes  ,   have you lived there for many years  ?  
I've been here for seventeen years
and you arrived  ,   you've been there for seventeen years  ?  
ah  ?    here  ,   yes  ,   hmm
an  ,   we're almost the same  ,   I've been here in Philadelphia for fifteen  ,   before I lived in California  ,   I don't know if I told you but we were
yes aha
ah  ,   so good  ,   and  ,   how has it gone with the program  ,   do they call you every day  ?  
yes  ,   every day  ,   almost every day  ,   sometimes I haven't been there so the machine picks up but
ah
they get it because I haven't  ,   I haven't gone out but  ,   they're discussing now  ,   what is it  ?    About buying on the internet and the service of
aha  ,   by  ,   yes  ,   by telephone  ,   buying by telephone  ,   no  ?  
aha  ,   yeah
that if you've lost things  ,   for me a little bit but if I've bought something  ,   above all
hmm no  ,   I don't buy anything by telephone the only thing I've ordered on internet is travel
ah yes  ,   I've never bought travel  ,   I've bought other things on Ebay
yea ah no  ,   I don't like Ebay
Ebay  ,   well  ,   they're really idiots  ,   but I gave in  ,   and
no  ,   they sometimes get a lot of people with this stupid Ebay thing
yes  ,   no  ?    They changed me interest because
no  ,   no
my payment was delayed  ,   and I told them that  ,   that I was going to pay money order because I don't like these credit cards and
hmm yes well  ,   they remember the information on the  ,   it's another of the things that I don't like about buying on the internet
hmm
there you have to give your credit information that doesn't
but it there  ,   no  ,   and did you buy 
like  ,   it's not very trustworthy for me  ,   only people  ,   I buy tickets for JetBlue and companies  ,   American Airlines  ,   companies that I know more  ,   you know  ?  
would be but
and  ,   aha  ,   ah
like that  ,   things that offer like on ebay and  ,   no no  ,   here a man bought a car and  ,   and they dismissed him  ,   they took five thousand dollars from him
not me  ,   you know  ?   how can it be  ?  
yes  ,   they told him to send the five thousand dollars  ,   they sent him
and they didn't send him anything  ?   and the
no  ,   nothing  ,   no the guy didn't even exist then well he stayed without money
and  ,   oh  ,   and then  ,   what  ,   they didn't return it to him  ?  
no  ,   no because he sent a certified check  ,   the guy changes on behalf of another person who doesn't exist with  ,   with fake papers
goodness and the charge appeared but the person is not known
exactly no the people where he said that he had  ,   the car dealer never existed
like  ,   and one that thinks that with a check well  ,   you can trace  ,   a friend of mine it happened
aha
similar but with tickets from  ,   but not like that of her searching but rather that they offered her a cruise  ,   right  ?  
aha
for  ,   for her and the husband  ,   but a company like that with name and address and phone and all  ,   then she like put it through her credit card  ,   to reserve
oh my god
more like five hundred  ,   a thousand  ,   I don't know  ,   a part of  ,   of the tickets  ,   later when they went to call the travel agency and that they told her that didn't exist
and look nor alive nor dead they returned it  ,   what happens is that the credit cards it seems that they do give a part to the person right  ?  
if  ,   if you  ,   if you claim it withing a certain time  ,   that they have a time limit for you to make the statement
mm
they give you back a part of it  ,   yes  ,   aha
oh yes  ,   your card shows that something that you paid before  ,   or something like that was reimbursed  ,   but  ,   she paid two things and then the other thing she paid it in a different way  ,   so no
well  ,   they pick his information to use it as they want  ,   that's shy I'm telling you that this service of
I don't like it  ,   I don't like personals either  ,   but I'd like to have one to look for a job  ,   to post my CV online I think that's a good service
yes  ,   well  ,   I use it for that too and
the Internet  ,   and the
and one time  ,   I was scammed by the fishers scammers  ,   I think that's their name  .  
aha
they send you an urgent email in which you have to provide your information for MSN as I use MSN to connect to the internet  .  
mm
so  ,   it said that MSN needed to update my information  ,   so the foolish I am  ,   started putting it and  ,   what did I do  ?   I included my bank account
so  ,   then it said that I had to put  my PIN  ,   please put your PIN number and then I realized  ,   and I thought  ,   I don't like that  ,   nobody wants to know it  ,   why do they have to know my PIN number  ?  
exactly  ,   aha
so  ,   I stopped there and I called MSN through the phone and they told me  ,   no mam  ,   no
that's personal info  ,   aha
it's not us  ,   please change your password  ,   you know  ,   the password to log in and all of that
aha  ,   the ID  ,   aha
so  ,   I had to change all of it  ,   change the bank account  ,  
yes  ,   they caught a lot of people a lot of people fell into that trap  ,   it said that your bank needed to update your info or I don't know what else
aha
and it was to steal your identity and everything from people
uye  ,   I  ,   I got scared
this is why I don't like it  ,   on the telephone  ,   well  ,   what have I bought on the telephone  ,   have I asked for anything ont he tel   ?    I don't think I've ordered
pizza  ,   pizza is the only thing I order on the telephone  ,   pizza and
no
and Chinese rice
I don't
on the telephone I haven't bought anything  ,   anything
it makes me laugh  ,   yes  ,   I buy pizza and sandwiches  ,   the only thing I bought on the telephone  ,   right  ?    It was a special that  ,   only the computer
that came out from Hewlett Packard that I  ,   I loved this brand and since I had clothes that  ,   that they already sold me a scam
hmm  ,  
and I fell for it and 
this has happened to you  ,   eh  ?  
by watching the Hispanic channel  ,   and there were some things and you had to go and ask on your computer  ,   on sale  ,   the special  ,   six hundred dollars  ,   everything  ,   well
aha  ,   these old computers that they repare
yes
aha  ,   yes  ,   they change the memory and all that
yes but it only lasted two months  ,  
we bought one for  ,   well  ,   I don't  ,   my boyfriend bought it  ,   but  ,   he bought it from Dell and it's really good the one we're using now
ah  ,   well yes  ,   is a good brand
yes but you know that  ,   that you paid it like that little by little and he ordered it through  ,   through the  ,   he saw the ad on TV and then
I 
he filled it out on the  ,   aha  ,   he filled it out on the internet and he bought it and it has come out good
and they gave him partial payments
aha  ,   yes exactly  ,   he paid I think that thirty seven dollars it was something like that
ah how good  ,   ah no  ,   well is  ,  
aha  ,   some silly thing  ,   but he finished paying it
ah well great  ,   but for me it came out  ,   I bought the
ah it came out damaged  ?  
no that of the  ,   of the Hispanics  ,   it came out for getting into  ,   for seeing those and I paid them six hundred
and they didn't return anything  ?  
no the company disappeared afterwards  ,   all the telephone numbers others came out  ,   there
ah my God yes that all of those are searchers  ,   this people don't know  ,   don't know what else to invent of garbage to
with advertisement mm
get money from the people
in Telemundo they got from me  ,   and the  ,   okay now the one I bought from Hewlett Packard no  ,   that one was  ,   a brand name and guaranteed
yes  ,   those are good  ,   aha  ,   aha
that one arrived perfect  ,   and and How did I buy the Gateway one ah well  ,   you remember there were some offers that you  called Gateway  ?   and they approved me
I gave my son a Gateway one but that one  ,   was paid and nothing happened
no but these are companies that you can trust  ,   like  ,   I see things that  ,   these announcements
ah  ,   aha
As pretty turuliles and these  ,   these things that they offer like a trip
hmm  ,  
look one of my friends was told that she had won a trip  ,   there  ,   where did she go  ?  
how will it happen  ?  
and until a girl from here was  ,  I was laughing because after my friend gave it to me I saw the girl from
I think it was on  ,   on channel three who was saying that she and her husband were sent one of these papers that said that they'd won a vacation to Mexico and  ,   no
in the mail  ?  
and so  ,   eh  ,   no  ,   via fax
ah good  ,   ah
via fax  ,   so they sent you that you've won a trip of whatever  ,   you call this number and they tell you now and she said that they painted it as wonderful  ,   and so when she got to
the place where the hotel was  ,   it was a terrible place  ,   the pool didn't have water  ,   it was full of mud  ,  
ah nice  ,   and  ,   but they were able to go to Mexico and everything  ?  
yes  ,   they were able to go  ,   but I tell you  ,   they bought it  ,   but they said that  ,   they didn't have anything for free  ,   so they ended up spending almost three thousand dollars
they gave them  ,   um  ,   sure  ,   no vacation
for the tele  ,   ah  ,   they robbed them  ,   ah  ,   they had to pay the taxes  ,   they charged them a lot of taxes for the hotel so they had to pay  ,   it didn't include tips or
a horrible room
aha  ,   not he room  ,   she  ,   well  ,   she told everything because since she's a reporter well she made a full report
there's
then  ,   is  ,   she sat as if they were in the moca  ?   when she arrived there  ,   she went on a cruise that they offered she says the ship  ,   she arrived and I was afraid for her to take it because I thought that the ship was going to fall apart from how rotten it was
a little boat there
flabbergasted  ,   aha  ,   aha
cheaply painted  ,   ah how horrible
well  ,   she says that horrible  ,   the food she says that  ,   she says look I even didn't dare to eat because I thought I was going to be poisoned
and they ended up paying quite a lot more money  ,   spending a lot of money  ,   because then already  ,   well they didn't dare  ,   they got out of it and well they got on a plane and got
mm they passed by a
to another place  ,   but the girl   ,   I was laughing when I saw the girl  ,   that she's a reporter  ,   you know  ,   they made a fool of her  ,   but she  ,   she filmed everything  ,   she filmed the  ,   the room if you saw the doors the
ah
the doors below all coming apart and with  ,   like with that mold  ,   horrible  ,   horrible
of aluminum mm one gets sick from that  ,   better to leave from there because possible that
yes that's why that of  ,   of buying things that they send me by fax and that they send me offers of those
I erase them  ,   now they send me of Carnival Cruise  ,   Carnival Cruise  .  
ah okay  ,   and  ,   and not of  ,   you know when  ?   what I  ,   what I do is I go to where it says
is super cheap
when they say I start to read it there  ,   and then if you read the fine print it tells you  ,   this offer is not  ,   is not  ,    affiliated
to a Carnival Cruise lines  ,   and as soon as I see that is not affiliated I forget it that I remove them
ah  ,   it says that is not  ?  
if  ,   if you read the really fine prints  ,   is that they are smart  ,   they   is like  ,   I don't know if you've seen on the computer
mm mm
you get this types of messages
Hello  ,   good evening
Hello Good evening  ,   with whom do I have the pleasure of talking  ?  
ah  ,   I'm Norma from here Atlanta  ,   Georgia  ,   and you  ?  
ah  ,   I'm  ,   my name is Silvia  ,   I'm in Philadelphia  .  
ah  ,   okay  ,   I think we spoke before  ?  
I think so  ,   yes
ah okay
I think so  ,   what country are you from Norma  ?  
ah  ,   I'm Peruvian  .  
ah  ,   no perhaps we've talked before  ,   I don't think I've spoken with anyone from Peru  .  
ah  ,   okay  ,   and where are you from  ?  
I'm from Cuba  .  
ah  ,   okay
yes  ,   it has been very interesting that I've talked with people from so many countries  .  
I've talked with  ,   with Cubans  ,   Puerto Ricans and well  ,   I think Cubans and Puerto Ricans only I think
Ah  ,   no me too  ,   just yesterday I was talking with  ,   with a Spaniard  .  
ah  ,   yes and with a Spaniard also  ,   I spoke with a guy  .  
ah  ,   no mine was  ,   was with a girl  .  
aha
Eh  ,   and  ,   and  ,   and and from what country  ?   ah  ,   yes from Peru you told me  .  
mm
And how nice  ,   Peru must be interesting  .  
aha
I've never had the chance to go  .  
no yes  ,   yes  ,   no  ,   like all countries all places have something interesting
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,  
have something interesting  ,   right  ?  
Such a rich patrimony that Peru has  .  
sure  ,   eh  ,   the culture is very
yes  ,   and how many years have you been here Norma  ?  
ah ten years
ah eh  ,   How's Atlanta  ,   do you like it  ?  
yes  ,   more or less  ,   right  ?   although I'm a little bored but well
ah
because I'm used to traveling everywhere   ,   since I belong to a religious community
ah
then they were always sending me to different places  .   But now  ,   well  ,   I'm here because I got married and have my kids  .   so  ,   and my husband works here  ,   so
ah  ,   and how many kids do you have  ?  
I have two one is seven and the other is three
ah  ,   little  .  
aha
aha ah  ,   d  e  y 
and you  ,   what  ,   do you have kids  ?  
eh  ,   I have three but
already adults  .  
they are already  ,   they are already big yes  .   One already works and the other two are in the university  .  
mm
So  ,   so I don't have kids in the house anymore
ah  ,   well more peaceful  ,  
yes  ,   yes  ,   is already more peaceful  ,   and how is Atlanta  ?   I was in Atlanta one or two time but it was years and years and years ago
ah  ,   really  ?  
and since then I know it has grown a lot and changed a lot  .   How is it  ,   what do you think about it  ?  
ah  ,   yes  ,   well Atlanta is a big city  ,   right  ?  
yes
compared to the cities in Peru
ah
no is very big here in  ,   no  ,   is the biggest city of  ,   of the southeast so
of course  ,   mm
mm so is  ,   yes  ,   really there are people  ,   a lot of Hispanics  ,   right  ?   there are people from everywhere
mm  ,   yes  ,   yes logically yes
aha
yes  ,   well  ,   they wanted us to talk of
of marketing  ,   spam  ,   spam
of yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes all those forms of marketing so annoying  .  
yes  ,   well  ,   well it bothers one ask for something and they call and they call and all the time and they want to sell you something  .  
yes Look I  ,   you should ask in your telephone company if they have something
aha
that mine offers  ,   that I have since a few years ago and here
mm
no  ,   those sales calls don't come in  .  
ah  ,   they don't come in  ?  
they don't come in  ,   don't come in  .   Is
mm
is a very good thing and that the people  ,   the majority of the people don't even know it exists  .  
mm mm
Eh  ,   no  ,   I don't remember what is called
mm
eh  ,   what  ,   what they call the service but is a service which recognizes when calls come in when there's no person's name there  ,   eh  ,   it only gives the number
but a name associated with the number is not given  .  
aha
And the the calls from these of marketign th  the normal thing is that  ,   that the number be given but without an associated name  .  
aha
And then when the system recognises that
it blocks
so  ,   well  ,   s  eh  ,   it doesn't exactly block what so it comes out to the phone a recording answers telling you to identify yourself  .  
ah  ,   OK
But  ,   the thing is not that I reach the phone and  ,   and  ,   they tell me that it's from a certain place and that I have to bother to say
mhm
that no  ,   it's something much better than that  .   Because
ah  ,   that's good  ,   look
because the thing is that  ,   that all these eh  ,   eh  ,   marketing systems are done by machine and that there is a machine
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes they do it by computer  ,   aha
yes  ,   yes  ,   that  ,   that the compute is programmed to dial a number and number  ,   and number  ,   and number  ,   and number
aha
and then the person picks up when there's already someone on the phone  .  
mhm
So when my recording answers to identify
mhm
the call gets lost because it's just a computer  .  
mhm ah  ,   that's a  ,   it's a very good meassure  ,   really  .  
Is good  ,   is good  ,   yes  .   That yes  ,   yes  ,   that
yes
what a shame  ,   that the majority of the people don't know it exists because it's given me a lot of peace during all these years  .  
yes I think that here the company that I think it is is bell south here in the south
aha
also has  ,   but is that I say that it has to apply to something  ,   or pay something more  .   something like that
ah I think that it's three of four dollars  ,  
yes  ,   for that type of service  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes it's really worth  .  
mm
and
Well  ,   they don't call me much to sell me  ,   some yes twice  ,   even
ah  ,   how nice
three times a week  ,   something like that  ,   yes  ,   but well  ,   and since always the connection  ,   right  ?   like you say is a computer that calls then I hold the phone and answer  ,   I have the phone and nobody  ,   nobody answers me  .   But I don't know
then I hang up because I know that it's a call of right  ?   because if it's a person right there they answer you say hello and right there they answer  .  
mm
that's how it is  .   Look  ,   and do you receive a lot of spam  ?  
Well  ,   and the computer  ?  
yes
yes there's always a lot of advertisement  ,   right  ?   there are a lot of things  .   But one  ,   I how you say delete them
ah  ,   delete yes
delete
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes I erase them  ,   mm
yes no I erase them and  ,   and and the problem ended
yes  ,   like that  ,   yes
no  ,   but  ,   but always  ,   sometimes is annoying and sometimes they send to many many things scams how they call it
com 
that they try to deceive you in some businesses and things like that  .   Those are dangerous right  ?   Even by phone  ,   they also do that type of
ah  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   aha
That type of right  ?   of work  .   One has to be careful with those things of advertisements  ,   mm
yes  ,   and  ,   and mm  ,   and when one enters into any international thing
mm
one  ,   one of the big scams are all the  ,   the scams from Nigeria  .  
mm  ,   ah  ,   really  ?  
yes  ,   oh  ,   that  ,   I read somewhere that the  ,   those scams was the second industry of Nigeria after the oil  .  
ah  ,   really  ?   I can't believe it  ,   how awful
ah  ,   yes  ,   yes no  ,   that's notorious  .  
yes  ,   not too long ago I received some  ,   eh  ,   some letters that a lawyer from  ,   from Africa I don't know  ,   Nigeria or I don't know  ,   another country
yes
but it was in Africa had been  ,   had been the  ,   the lawyer of this very rich family that had a lot of possessions and that well
aha  ,   aha
was looking for the relatives and that has come to the conclusion that I  ,   my family is one of the  ,   right  ?   the ones related with that
rich family that there's nobody from the inheritance that he has to distribute then he has to I have to contact him and give him my
information  ,   something like that  ,  
ah
Okay but that  ,   that you can say  ,   one immediately knows that is a
yes yes  ,   yes  ,   that  ,   that's typical of those scams from Nigeria  .  
a lie  ,   right  ?   because one doesn't have  ,   I say from where  ,   I don't have any connection with any African
no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   mm  ,   mm
I don't have African family if they said South America  ,   well maybe I start to think  .  
yes  ,   ah  ,   yes
But  ,   in Africa
is like that  ,   yes
No  ,   in Africa no  ,   that already  ,   is already completely  ,   no  ,   is a lie  .  
yes
That they try to deceive you  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   and it's incredible that there really are people that let themselves
mm
be scammed by those things  .  
aha yes that is  ,   is very dangerous right  ?   there are people that are in desperate situation or I don't know what
yes
aha they want to see  ,   try their luck  .  
and see and  ,   how did you know about this study  ?    because  ,   I knew because it's crazy here  ,   but how  ,   it called my attention that I've talked with people
in Chicago  ,   in Connecticut  ,   in Florida
Ah  ,   I knew because I enrolled in a survey company  ,   the survey scout  .  
ah  ,  
I enrolled in the company  ,   hmm  ,   I payed them thirty dollars so that they could send me their whole list of surveys  ,   of their companies
aha
who do surveys to do the surveys  ,   no  ?    and
yes  ,   yes  ,   just in these days I was seeing survey scout  ,   is it worth it  ?  
and respond  .    yes  ,   more or less  .    no  ?    because no  ,   like I don't know  ,   my personal case is that I really didn't get what I wanted to get  ,   no  ?  
Many times  ,   ah  ,   I find no  ?    a survey  ,   or a study that pays me thirty dollars but every now and then  ,   not every day  .  
And many times you don't qualify because  ,   eh they ask for different people  ,   no  ?    of a certain age
aha  ,   aha
or the  ,   people for example who are professionals  .    I  ,   I'm a home maker and I'm a landlady  ,   no  ?    or people who
have  ,   I don't know  ,   teenage kids  ,   and I have small kids  .    A question of  ,   they're different
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha
no  ?    conditions that you have to fill  .    And if you ju   ,   no  ,   yes  ,   if you have all the requisites and qualify and do the study and they pay you thirty dollars  ,   and well if they disqualify you and don't
and how many do you think that you do a year  ?  
well  ,   no  ,   well  ,   not many really  .    Well  ,   recently these people are really lucky because to me  ,   not really  ,   I don't get many  .    Sometimes I accumulate  ,   no  ?    I accumulate for
points  ,   my points and I can pass them for money in another company  ,   for example there's one that well I accumulate my points and I can change them for money  .   For one thousand five hundred
points they give me fifty dollars  .  
ah
Well  ,   but that's also the same case right  ?   they send you surveys but you have to qualify for those surveys  .   yes  ,   for  ,   with the requirements  ,   if not  ,  no  .  
mm yes  ,   here  ,   here in Philadelphia there's a  ,   a  ,   eh one of those groups that does  ,   eh  ,   group discussion
aha
and  ,   and I signed up with them because a friend recommended it  .  
aha
And  ,   and they would call me and they would call me and they would call me and they asked me a bunch of questions and there was always something
That would disqualify you  .  
that would make  ,   exactly  ,   yes  .  
yes is what happens to me too I've only done a study up to now that  ,  
yes
that they paid me one hundred fifty dollars
ah
right  ?   but only  this was last year
ah
no  ,   and that  ,   only that one hundred fifty dollars a year is not
I don't know yes
is not much  ,   is nothing  .  
no yes because I've just been seeing these things of  ,   of  ,   of
mm
that sell the information of the surveys that say that you can make thousands a month
ah  ,   yes  ,   but that's for  ,   only so that you register in that I think
ah  ,  
Because I also registered right  ?   there and paid them thirty dollars  .   Well  ,   also thirty dollars is not a lot right  ?   and they sent me the list of
yes  ,   thirty is not a lot  .  
Hi  ,   hi
Hello good  ,   Who am I talking to  ?  
ah  ,   you're talking to Vicente
Vicente
yes from New York  ,   and where are you from  ?  
ah I'm in Georgia  ,   Paulina
in Georgia
yes  ,   where are you from Vicente  ?  
ah
Where are you from  ?  
I  ,   I'm from Panama
from Panama
yes  ,   I spoke with a previous person  ,   from Georgia  ,   I don't remember
I from Chile  ,   ah yes
yes  ,   yes  ,   look from  ,   the matter that we have to talk about  ,   I didn't understand very well because the machine was speaking with
yes  ,   it spoke I think about  ,   about marketing of
of spam and telemarketing
of  ,   yes what happens with if you buy things through the internet and email that come to you even no  ,   no
well it's  ,   that's what here  ,   it's saying that if you buy  ,   not only is speaking about telemarketing and spam but also if they bought something like
yes
ah  ,   yes we bought something like that
or by phone when they call and offer you things
and they offer things like ah
yes
if they sell
I generally don't  ,   I don't even give them a chance of
you don't buy things like that
not unless I'm the one looking for the thing  ,   but I like it when they offer me  ,   yes  ,   yes
when they call you and they offer you ah
I buy a lot through the Internet but when I'm looking
ah  ,   exactly that is the with me if they call me to tell me something no  ,   but if I see something on television  ,   in a magazine  ,   in another place
and things that that I need right or things that I think that I want to know about that thing or that can is of the  ,   is of health  ,   something like that for health
maybe I buy it  ,   do you understand  ?  
eh yes
or something that I already know  ,   do you understand  ?  
yes
if you call me and you are offering me something maybe something for health that I already know that it's a medi  a pill or whatever right
if I already know of that  ,   of that  ,   that what you're talking or that you're offering me maybe I will buy it if the price is good
yes
but is for  very rarely that I do it  ,   do you understand me  ?  
yes I generally no  ,   I don't buy a lot of things if they call me  ,   only because there are so many of these who call and get your information and after no  ,   they're false
yes
and also want information  ,   because many of those who talk to you are offering something on the internet or over the phone  ,   many times they want your credit card number
yes credit
and you  ,   you have to stay there  ,   because you want  ,   do you understand what I'm saying  ?  
sure
you have to be careful with this
yes well
and sometimes they act like they're from a big company  ,   a major company
yeah
and they aren't
sure
so you have to be very
you need to do an investigation on the other side
yes I un 
this is what I do  ,   and whenever I go to buy something on the internet  ,   or something like that I go to see those sites where the
they put a rating  ,   how do you say rating  ?    that the
aha
well they say no  ,   they have the opinions of people who have used this company and say  ,   this wasn't a good company  ,   or they don't fail  ,   they don't send the things  ,   or they send it late or whatever
and very late
I do that  ,   I see that first and see how the company sounds and later I use it
ah
that's what we do when we buy things on the internet what things  what type of things have you bought
well  ,   I haven't bought  ,   I bought once with a  ,   a vitamin
some vitamins  ?  
yes
you like the health thing a lot
ah  ,   sometimes I think  ,   sometimes I think in health things because nowadays  ,   not only do you have to be buying health things but that not only of the food  ,   understand  ?  
aha
you have to  ,   get in something  ,   a supplement with the food not just the food  ,   so I think sometimes in getting something else because sometimes
I don't eat like I should eat  ,   you understand me  ?   I'm sometimes eating fast in the street and I'm eating this and the other
okay
and not only that because ah when one is from Latin America he of Latin last name thinks that they eat well but they don't eat well because
I think the truth is like that because the  ,   the food from Latin American is very greasy  ,   with a lot of fat and all that
of course it depends who cooks  ,   yes
yes and it depends what you are eating right  ,   but the thing is that one thinks that
but in general  ,   yes  ,   we use a lot of oil
a lot of oil and they think that  ,   I talk with the  ,   here in New York we have a lot of Dominicans and Puerto Ricans  ,   there's the food  ,   they think and think that they are eating better that the United States
the propaganda of Latin America is very strong  ,   you understand me  ?  
yes  ,   I find that in that case the difference is that there is in  ,   in Latin American generally one walks a lot  ,   well in New York I imagine you take the sub
yes
the subway
aha  .  
I don't know  ,   in Latin American you take the bus  ,   all those buses everywhere and almost  ,   not many people  ,   well there are people with cars obviously but
is more common walking and taking the
aha
the buses and things
well but
like it helps camouflage that  ,   that fat like you lose weight walking  ,   but when one is here and keeps eating the same and plus on top of that you go in car
well  ,   the thing is that where you live in Georgia perhaps they use cars a lot and California the same  ,   in California you go everywhere in car
yes
because the people you don't know  ,   the people from New York walk more than many people that  ,   that
yes is that you are in the city itself
in the city itself  ,   exactly so you walk
yes that city is very crazy
is still very hard having a car
yes
the car you move the car it cost you two three hundred dollars a month to park the car
sure
you understand me  ?  
and it's really full of cars
yes no  ,   we use public transportation  ,   you know  ?  
and it's good because they have  ,   the bus passes here every hour so  ,   what you do  ,   if you miss it then you have to wait an hour stuck there
yes  ,   we walk a lot in the city  ,   I was reading a report on this and
in what part of New York are you in  ?  
I'm in the city itself  ,   Manhattan
in Manhattan
New York  ,   New York man  ,   the city of man  ,   New York consists of five boroughs and they're called boroughs  ,   ok  ,   there are five
five  ,   what  ?  
five  ,   they say  ,   I don't know how you say it in Spanish  ,   five blocks  ,   no not blocks but five  ,   ah
neighborhoods  ,   neighborhoods
no  ,   it's bigger than a neighborhood  ,   much bigger than a neighborhood  ,   the city of New York consists of five boroughs  ,   no  ,   I'm always looking for the word for boroughs but I can never find it
there are five boroughs in New York city
ah yes  ,   Manhattan  ,   Queens  ,  
exactly  ,   Manhattan  ,   Queens
what else  ?  
ah  ,   Staten Island  ,   Manhattan  ,   Queens  ,   and the Bronx
the Bronx  ,   I know
there are many
Brooklyn  ,   Queens  ,   Manhattan
do you know  ,   Brooklyn  ,   Queens and Manhattan
and the island  ,   that is more
Staten Island that is State  ,   Island
like I don´t know I know it  ,   no maybe we did went there
a a a that part too the Bronx the Bronx there is much
yes the Bronx I think that I did not go to visit we
yeah  ,   yeah because the Bronx there are many Puerto Ricans
yeah
in Manhattan in the upper part of Manhattan in the north of Manhattan there are many Dominicans
yeah
see and even when I am here  ,   the  ,   the Puerto Ricans speak Spanish very bad
very fast I imagine
Oh my God no  ,   not only fast  ,   the thing is that we wll you know have some words slang that belong to a country  ,   a region  ,   in your country there are some regions where people talk different do you understand me  ?  
aha
but there is a base there where you can understand the Puerto Ricans  ,   they a a problem with the r they have a problem with the r
the Puerto Ricans pronounce it different
"pelo" instead of "pero"
like a  ,   more like an L
you know  ,   when I say "pelo"
hmm
but the  ,   the hair is what they have in the hair
yes they pronounce it different
and the dog is what runs  ,   is an animal they  ,   they  ,   have problems with the  r itself  ,   all the words that have  r they have problems with that
the ones from other countries that I've know and was hard to understand at first was El Salvador
aha
it was also hard
okay
understanding the Salvadorans
but  ,   I can understand many other countries  ,   I can understand them very well  ,   but the truth that I see the Puerto Ricans that there are so many words  ,   how are you going to have problems with the  r
the  r  ,   then there are many words that you can't pronounce  ,   you understand me  ?  
yes
I'm going to tell you that
and you Where are you from  ?   from Panama  ,   right  ?  
ah yes is Panama  ,   yes
yes
Panama  ,   a small country  ,   understand  ?  
yes
three million but is very developed  ,   because the Panama commerce is very big but  ,   the Panama Canal in all parts of the world  ,   you understand me  ?  
and there  ,   is very commercial there
yes I can imagine  ,   I have  ,   I have a friend who is from Panama
yes  ,   yes  ,   it's developed for a small country  ,   you know what I mean  ?   and there  ,   there  ,   they've always had  ,   Panama's currency has always been the United States' currency
dollars  ,   that's Panama's currency
they have so much commerce
ah
they have so much commerce
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   we use the dollar  ,   the American dollar  ,   right  ?   it's just that when you have money in your country  ,   it's money from the United States
um  ,   yeah
and there's a lot  ,   there was a time when we had more than a hundred banks  ,   for a small country that has nothing because  ,   the commerce  ,   do you know what I mean  ,   from all over the world
and what's Panama like  ?   it has three million
people
yes  ,   but  ,   how many millions does the biggest city have  ?  
the biggest city is Panama  ,   Panama City
I see
that's Pana  ,   that's the capital as well
and how many people does it have
no  ,   I don't how many exactly  ,   I can't tell you how many people  ,   because it's changed so much  ,   I left Panama more than 30 years ago
the situation has changed a lot there  ,   there are more people living away from the capital
I see
you know what I mean  ,   Panama city expanded  ,   it's like Mexico  ,   Mexico city
yeah
understand  ?  
yes well
well consider it
but Mexico  ,   the city of Mexico has millions
exactly  ,   it was  ,   it was  ,   no at one time it was the most populated city in the world
bigger what Mexico
Mexico city  ,   yes
yes
yes  ,   it was the most populated in the world  ,   because you have the capital you have the country of Mexico right  ?  
yes yes is huge
in Mexico city you know what I mean
yes
understand me  ?   while in other countries  ,   the United States  ,   there's no capital like that in the United States there's no capital of the United States  ,   the capital of the United States is Washington  ,   DC understand  ?  
yes  ,   but it's a political capital  ,   more than anything
yes  ,   politically  ,   only for  ,   Mexico  ,   the capital of Mexico
is not for the number of residents
yes  ,   of residents at one time it had more people than New York many  ,   many people didn't know that and still still like that the city of  ,   of Mexico  ,   capital of Mexico had more people that all  ,   all the world
but ah that was before  ,   I've always liked a man named Puentes he was one of Mexico philosophy and things like that he  ,   he wrote many books and things
aha
he had a bridge  ,   a good vision  ,   how do you say it  ,   he could say things that many Latins didn't like to hear
yes
so
good political eyesight or something
he wrote about political and situations in general
I see
in general  ,   you know what I mean  ?   he writes about many things in general and when he writes he makes you think a lot
What's his forename  ?  
Puentes  ,   I can't remember the forename  ,   I don't know  ,   no  ,   Puentes
I see  ,   the surname
political  ,   how is it  ?   political active  ,   philosopher  ,   he writes about a lot of things
I see  ,   philosophy
and everything  ,   you would like to talk to him
I see
Well  ,   good night  .   Carmen
good night okay what do you want  ?  
I am Jenny
I talked to you yesterday  ,   or the day before yesterday  .  
yes it is in Nebraska
okay How are you  ?  
yes  ,   I´m fine
okay today´s episode is about
telemarketing and spam
okay  ,   okay  ,   you start however you want
yes  ,   I don't like when people calls by phone trying to sell things
okay
because they always speak in a time that should not call
okay  ,   specially when people are eating and  things like that
yes
okay
okay  ,   they don´t take a no as an answer
okay
they are always working trying to sell things
okay  ,   okay  .  
and sometimes it's not even the truth
aha  ,   aha
mhm and you know  ,   it bothers me that when you look at your email
aha
it's full of trash  ,   of spam I don't even read them I just take a look and the email has this folder
aha
it's called bookmail and you can just delete it  ,   I don't even look at it
aha  ,   well  ,   I'm going to tell you something  ,   look
aha  ,   aha
I get lots of telephone calls because there are some companies that have five cents per minute  ,   right  ?   long distance since I use the phone
to call long distance
aha  ,   aha
well  ,   I call my mom to Puerto Rico everyday  .  
aha
so  ,   they call me and say they charge five cents per minute and I don't listen to them
aha
and then they keep on calling me they want to speak with the person who owns the phone  ,   it's me but I always tell them that
yes
the person is not here  ,   he's not here  ,   so they ask me at what time is he getting home and I say  ,   at nine PM  ,   so that they stop bothering me
aha  ,   oh aha
and yeah after nine at night they don't call me but the other day they started all day long they called me and the machine answers when I see the caller ID
aha  ,   oh
that it's long distance  ,   MCI I tell them no  ,   and I won't pick up the phone
aha
but every now and then they come and call me  ,   well sometimes I get up to fifteen  ,   sixteen calls a day
aye God
but I don't answer because ah  ,   I'm already tired of them and
aha
ah and always when I go to work and when I come home the machine is full of messages  ,   the caller ID is full of numbers
aha
and what I do is I hear the messages
aha
and the ones that aren't important I erase
aha
but those that interest me  ,   yes  ,   I take down the number and I call who I have to call
aha
but ah also the telephone company like two years ago  ,   the telephone company  ,   I was in Puerto Rico
aha
and my daughter stayed there  ,   with my son living in my apartment
aha
and the telephone company called my house here
aha
but I told my kids don't get the phone when it's the telephone company don't get it at all
ah
because they start to sell that if they have phone with camera  ,   that if they have phone with answering machine with caller id
aha
that if they have cordless phone cheap and all  ,   I tell my kids don't get the phone for nothing
aha
that it's from the telephone company since they call here I don't know how they changed my telephone number without me giving them permission
really  ?  
that supposedly when you are you are responsible for your own phone
aha
you are the one that gives the authorization for them to change the number
aha  ,   ah
and they changed it without me giving well I didn't  ,   I was in Puerto Rico
aha  .  
and my kids never answered the phone
aha
then ah
ah
I don't know how they do telemarketing I receive every four five days but I never answer either
mhm you know that with the MCI you just
aha
you have to tell them to erase your name from the computer and they don't dial you up again
so that they don't bother you ohhh
aha you ask them to erase your name from the computer
aha  ,   aha
and like that they don't dial you again
oh so in the mail I receive many applications
mhm oh me too
from yes credit cards if I want to apply for a credit card
aha
subscriptions for magazines the what I do is that I tear up everything
aha
I throw it in the the ah in the garbage because I don't dare leaving a paper
ah
I mean I shred it
aha
and I throw it in the garbage can because I'm afraid of tearing it only once and throwing it in the garbage can
aha
and that someone ah since that has so much personal information
it
someone gets it and steals my identity
yes
then the spam doesn't worry me because I don't use the computer  ,   I hardly ever use the computer
oh aha
but my daughter yes  ,   my daughter uses the computer a lot and she says  ,   and she says that when ah it has a lot ah they send a lot of spam
aha
and well she receives like fifty spam email
oh aha
and she what she does is that she erases all the ones that don't interest her
aha
sometimes ah the the  ,   they sell her a lot of things through the email and she all that interest her she buys but hardly ever
aha
because what they sell is garbage
yes
then ah they also send me in the mail many letters of insurance
yes me too
of life that since I already turned fifty that I already have to get a life insurance so that my loved ones don't stay ah
bankrupt when I die  ,   many things
Yes
I also get lots of letters from banks to become a member
right
and  .    .    .   but i don't listen to them  ,   what i do is i read them  ,   i tear them and i throw them into the trash can
Uh huh
because if you listen to all of those letters  ,   you'll end up bankrupt and you'll start sending
yes
finding everything they advertise
Yes  ,   that's how it is ¿right  ?    ,   i even put my name on that list
So  ,   right
that i don't get telemarketing calls
Right
and they're still calling me
ok  ,   because a girl  ,   i stalked to a girl yesterday about this very thing
Right
she lives in Philadelphia and she told me that [if] i call a number and i call a place
right
and tell them not to send me any more letters  ,   that I'm not interested about insurance or credit cards or anything
right
and all  ,   and they get me off the list
oh aha
to do not send me because sometimes the mailbox  ,   I have a mailbox
aha
and I have to go everyday the the seven  ,   the six days of the week I have to go for my letters
aha  ,   aha
because it gets so full so and so much that if someone send me a package they cannot put it inside the mailbox I have to pick it up inside the mail office
yes  ,   yes
and that is a waste of time too too here at home I have a big mailbox
aha  ,  
and they put inside it garbage  ,   a lot a lot a lot of garbage of of papers and today I receive one from from globe insurance I don´t know where that is
oh I also received that today aha
and I said why do that people send me this if
aha
what for am I going to take a life insurance if you pay more for life insurance than they are going to give  ,   what
what they are going to give you
yes
then ah I told my daughter not now every time as the owner of the house put a big garbage collector
aha
every time I receive letters that I am not interested in I break them and throw in the garbage
do you know what my grandmother´s husband does
aha  ,   aha
when they send things  ,   he always puts an envelope inside the card
aha
he puts all their papers
aha
And back the envelope  ,   they send it back
they break it and you send it back to them
yes
and they send it back again ah ah
ah
they send the paper back again or what  ?  
I don't know if the company sends back another  ,   but he always breaks the cards
aha
and you put it in their envelope and they send it back in the mail
ohhhhhhhhhhh interesting
always ah
so it doesn't continue because it's a lot
yes
and they bother you on the telephone too  ,   they bother you  ,   they send cards ah  ,   in the mail
aha
because the mailbox fills up a lot a lot a lot
yes always what gets me a lot is someone calling to ah  ,   sell children's books
oh like like the it's that one that comes
yes
and encyclopaedias and all yes yes
aha
yes before the used to call me not any more thanks God
yes
because now my children are grown ups
yeah they always tell me that
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha
and now they don't call me from from the phone companies yes AT and T and MCI called me a lot
aha
but now now I told them that well that that
aha
I erased my name and I told them that I have Spring and I am happy with them
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha
with them and now now they don't bother me with that
well the other time about two weeks ago someone called me and as I was working the left the phone number in the caller ID
aha
I come and say I don´t know this telephone  ,   I don´t know the number  ,   I called back and it was a telephone company
Oh my God
and tells me thank you for calling but see right now I came from work I am sorry but I cannot talk to you because I am tired and want to eat
call me later  ,   later was ten at night I know they are not going to call me nothing more
aha
but when ah they call me I will recognize the number I will not
aha
answer but when they call me and I do not recognize the number in the box
aha  ,   aha
I call them back but when there are those the companies selling you a thing selling you another one that if changing you to another long distance company
aha
I tell them I am sorry I cannot talk to you now I don´t have the time call me in one or two hours
aha
and if one hour or two if they call me I have the number in the box I know is the same person who
is calling me but it bothers very much much much much
aha yes short time ago they called me telling that ah a company was going to give me back some money I spent on things like people that sell things on the phone
aha
and needed the number of my bank account to deposit money
oh
and I told him that I don´t have a bank account and told me that
aha
if I had an account there in the same town where I live
aha
I told him I don't I told him sorry but I don't have an account
aha
if you really are going to return the money
Hello  ,   Hi  .   Who do I have the pleasure to talk with  ?  
Hi  ,   good afternoon  .   I'm Josefina  ,   from Philadelphia  ,   and you  ?  
Eh  ,   I am  ,   my name is Silvia  ,   I'm from Philadelphia too  .  
Ah  ,   how are you  ?   Nice to meet you  .  
Nice to meet you  .   What's  ,   what's your name again  ?  
Josefna  .  
Ah  ,   Josefina  .  
I don't know if we have talked before
Oh  ,   right  ,   yes because I remember because is my aunt's name  .  
ah  ,   yes  ,   righ
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   coincidence  ,   yes
What country is the family from  ?  
Eh  ,   we are Cubans  .  
Ah  ,   correct  ,   I think we have talked
yes  ,   and you are from  ?  
the family and everybody from Venezuela
Ah
Aha
No  ,   maybe  ,   maybe we haven't talked  ,   I think that that I haven't talked with anybody from Venezuela  .  
Ah  ,   well then we haven't  ,   is that we have talked with so many people
yes  ,   that's  ,   right you kind of loose the notiion
yes  ,   I  ,   a few days ago  ,   I have
yes
done around fourteen or fifteen calls  ,   no  ?  
yes  ,   I  ,   I believe I have too
Oh  ,   and how has it been to you  ,   you get to meet lots of interesting people  .  
yes  ,   it's nice  ,   right  ?   You get to meet lots of people  .  
I like it too  ,   yes
yes  ,   yes  ,   I was speaking yesterday to a lady from Peru and the day before yesterday I spoke to a woman from Spain  .  
Oh  ,   that's nice  .  
yes  ,   it is  ,   yes
And they live in different cities
All of them  ,   yes  ,   aha  ,   aha  .  
Ah  ,   I see  .  
yes  ,   one of them lives in Atlanta  .  
Aha  .  
And I've spoken to people in Chicago and a woman from Texas and people from Connecticut  ,   oh
Aha  ,   and New York too  ,   no  ?   New York
yes  ,   with  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
Mhm  .  
yes  .  
Yes Is interesting and mm that topic I don't understand too much  ,   I think that it's of marketing and that  ,   right  ?  
Yes  ,   of  ,   of what one thinks of  ,   of those variants of
Yesterday I laughed a lot with a lady  ,   because we were talking of  ,   ah  ,   when we buy things through the internet or through the mail
Aha  .  
or through the phone  ,   because ones sees the advertisement sometimes on the TV
Aha  ,   aha
and places the  ,   and places the order by uh  ,   phone but
yes
ah  ,   they have deceived me
Ah  ,   really  ?  
with a computer that I bought the first time
Aha  ,   what happened  ?  
and that thing arrived eh for watching Spanish channel  ,   Telemundo
Aha  .  
and the offer came out and some men right  ?   and then when I ordered it and it arrived
Mm  .  
and it was like that some pieces that you could see that were used  ,   right  ?  
Ah  .  
and of different brands  ,   for example the keyboard of the computer was one brand  ,   the screen was another and like that
Ah  .  
then  ,   that after two months got damaged and I sent it  ,   right  ?  
Mm  .  
to get fixed  ,   then they returned it   ,   and that fixed and it got damaged again and I called and already the phones were of another
Ah  .  
they weren't of the company
Ah  .  
so I lost that money  ,   I threw away the computer
Ah  ,   and they that happen to be so expensive that were then the computers  .  
yes  ,   but this was a good offer  ,   and that's why I thought that it was a
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
a profit and what I did was lose the six hundred dollars that I paid  .  
Ah  ,   what a sin  .   And  ,   it could be that  ,   that  ,   that in the Hispanic channels eh  ,   is eh  .  
They don't check much
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   that's why  ,   yes perhaps the companies are less trustworthy  .  
they sell right  ,   the creams  ,   I don't buy those things  ,   now even less
yes  .  
some creams and some
Mm  .  
and vitamins and I say that maybe those things cause harm
Mm  .  
And this  ,   and the other lady spoke to me about other people who also lost for
Ah  .  
Ah  ,   while traveling  ,   no  ?   That they have sent them to sell trip tickets
Ah  ,   and yes  ,   they are great losses  .  
Uh huh  ,   and they have bought and paid and then they discover that no ticket exists  ,   no travel ticket  ,   nothing  .  
And  ,   and mm  ,   and where did they get them  ?   through Hispanic channels  ?  
No  ,   I believe that it came by fax  ,   she said  .  
Ah
A fax where they tell you this  ,   there is this travel deal  ,   for example  ,   and this was for Mexico  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  .  
and we will pay everything  ,   and then  ,   it was not cheap  ,   right  ?  
Uh huh  .  
And then you get these marvelous pictures  .  
uh huh
the hotel  ,   and how was this  ,   and the restaurants  .  
mm  .  
and when they arrived there it was crap
ah  .  
That everything was dirty or the beds broken  ,   the doors are  ,   eh  ,   everything moldy  ,   so that like you can't even touch things
Um
dirty  ,   the sheets  ,   well  ,   they had to  ,   they had to rent somewhere else and they left somewhere else  ,   ¿right  ?  
Oh
it was  ,   they lost what they had payed for
Um
but the pictures were wonderful and
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
and what they offered then  ,   they said they spent twice as much because they had to
yes
to  ,   of course they weren't staying in that filthy place
No  ,   no  ,   of course not  ,   oh
and i say  ,   oh my god  ,   because they have sent me a lot of  ,   from  ,   they say Meat Cross Valcruz  ,   ¿right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   but those are more serious
And  ,   yes  ,   but she tells me  ,   reed  ,   reed way down  ,   it says it's not connected to the carnival company
Oh  ,   they use the name
the use the name
Oh
And they're impostors  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   so
Uh huh
And you think they are that
Uh huh
And he went to buy that and then
Sure  ,   sure  ,   yes
these people that paid to Mexico  ,   uh  ,   they payed by check
Uh huh
And  ,   well  ,   the check was cashed by a person that doesn't exist  ,   bogus name
Uh huh
With fake id's  ,   so they could never ask for a devolution like it happened to me with the computer
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
it's terrible
What a sin  ,   for people so evil to exist  ,   that want to steal people's money  ,   ¿right  ?  
I think so  ,   i say I'm so scared about so many things that you no longer know who to trust  ,   ¿right  ?  
yes  ,   i really  ,   for example  ,   offers or things that show up in  ,   uh  ,   Hispanic things  ,   i wouldn't trust anything
Right  ,   it's seems untrue  ,   it's too bad  ,   really  ,   that
That  ,   yeah  ,   right
that you have to say that
Yes  ,   exactly yes
thing
but it's just that American things are more serious
Sure  ,   with  ,   sure  ,   and the signature  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   oh
yes  .  
he name of the thing that you're buying  ,   and like a site where you can  ,   eh have a customer service to call  ,   like where you can complain and everything
Sure  ,   hmm  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
but if those who are there are the same who sell and are the same who charge and are the sa 
yes
what are you going to do  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
Aye God  ,   and what do you think about Cuba and Venezuela  ?    With this Chavez guy  ,   aye  ,  
Aye  .  
It's a tragedy  ,   here we're really sad  .  
And  ,   and I don't know how they certified this election of this Carter who was
Hmm  .  
and said that the election was legitimate
Because this  ,   aye  ,   I remember  ,   I was remembering today that ah  ,   they duplicated the identification of the ID
Hmm  .  
They went out on
Hmm  .  
on the internet  ,   they send me an advisory but this is  ,   that the voting there is very rare  ,   for example  ,   out of ten million people a million will go
and vote  ,   and that's all there is  ,   no  ?  
Aha  .  
sorry  ,   it's that  ,   they should say no  ,   there's no election or something because no  no one came
All the same  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
and it's what happened that those who go are so few
Ah  ,   aha  .  
that they say  ,   well  ,   I won because I ended up with so many votes but
yes  .  
it's that people abstained and so this is what's happening
And why did they abstain  ?  
the first time  because since they were all  ,   desperate to get out of the regime that no one voted but I don't know  ,   I imagine that for  ,   well obviously this man stayed
Ah  .  
and everyone believed in him  ,   no  ?  
Aha  .  
so some people voted  ,   thirty percent  ,   I think  ,   of the voting population
This is really little  ,   around here
aha  .  
because here in the United States  ,   eh  ,   few people vote but they vote about fifty percent  ,   something like that I think
Ah  ,   something like that  ,   this has to be because
yes  .  
they have to count the votes that weren't powerful  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
Then that was the first time  ,   later everybody already said  ,   no we'll never do this again  ,   let's vote even if it's against the other person  ,   but
Sure  .  
after they've done it  ,   then already this  ,   this  ,   has so much force that they cancel uh  ,   well  ,   they do the  ,   the impossible so that you can't see the  ,   the opposite but rather the
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   What a sin  .  
And that is the part that  ,   yes  ,   already the people won't be able to do more
And I regret that in the United States they are not concerned about that  ,   nor do they give any publicity to what's happening in Venezuela  .  
well  ,   how the tyranny how it is  ,   right  ?  
Like that  .  
that one doesn't even know because they don't even publish it that one  ,   one finds out through their family and through other people
Sure  ,   yes  .  
No  ,   I feel very bad for Venezuela because  ,   with seeing that  ,   that Chavez eh is such a lover of Fidel Castro  ,   one  ,   one already understands what type of regime he wants to impose
Ah  .   And today that they said  ,   my dad told me here in the television that Venezuela was Venezuela and Brazil  ,   the two worst countries that  ,   that have not contributed anything in Latin America  .  
with Cuba
Mm  ,   mm
but  ,   and instead they came out that they don't do anything for anybody  .  
This is bad  ,   right  ?  
yes  .    And who knows if he will use it to make each  ,   ah  ,   evil against
and to do damage  ,   yes  .  
He says that  ,   what  ,   from here they wanted to do a  ,   a  ,   how do you say  ?   an ambush and kill him  ,   well  ,   there there are many people who want
How good  ,   right  ?  
them to leave after they sent him to the other side
yes  ,   hmm  .  
but  ,   I don't know and so  who knows  ?   he says that this is very certain  ,   but here it's not planned and there there's a lot
eh  ,   of soldiers and near Venezuela and on the island in front  ,   no  ?    and there are ships  ,   and there's this  ,   there are airplanes
but who knows if it's true or made up  ,   because he's such a liar
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
that you don't know what he says
yes  ,   yes  .  
you can't believe it  ,   but what a pity  ,   hopefully this will have another  ,   another life  ,   no  ?  
Aye  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
another way of getting out of this
But they're such liars  ,   I was watching an interview last night where an American man who had  ,   he  ,   had passed a year in Cuba was saying  ,   aye  ,   everything in Cuba's good  ,   only that
oh
eh  ,   they are materially backwards
Mm  .  
Those are people that don't even know what they are saying  ,   I think  .   Because they are not living in the  ,   the toughness of that  ,   right  ?  
they go and look and say ah  ,   they are
Bessy
Oh  ,   Tammy  ,   how are you  ?  
What's up  ?   Look  ,   I was thinking  ,   oh  ,   when will I talk to Tammy  ?  
Oh  ,   it's just that every day at six o'clock I have been running  ,   and I just forgot my number to log in  ,   and my computer is giving mew some problems  ,   so the other day I just decided to remember the number
aha
And so  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?   how was your weekend  ?   I know we are not supposed to talk about weekend  ,   but  ,   oh well
No  ,   I went on hikinf this weekend
Aha  ,   oh
around here  ,   in Mount Baker
Oh  ,   I see  .   And
My bones still hurt  .   Inventing
I can see from here  ,   the  ,   yeah
From there  ?   yes  ,   when I was up there  ,   some people from Canada
Really  ?  
Up there  ,   I got to
Aha
I said  ,   let's walk seven miles forward and seven miles back  ,   but no way  ,   I walked four miles because it was so plain and wide
almost two feet wide
Mhm
and after I went down there  .    And it was earth  ,   and rocks  ,   and water  ,   and  ,   and I wasn't used to this  .    So  ,   i said  ,   no  ,   man  ,   Mr  ,  
Ah  .    Aye  ,   how terrible  .  
Hey  ,   so  ,   no one from telemarketing has called you lately  ?  
Ah  ,   I want to see  .    Ah  ,   no  ,   no no one  .    And you  ?    Really  ?  
Aha  ,   because my son laughs when they call me  ,   I say  ,   because it was  ,   it was part of refinancing the house  ,  
Aha  .  
and so  ,   since they're always calling me  ,   I say no  ,   the woman rents the house  ,   she's not here  .    He watches me and says  ,   who are you talking too  ?  
And I say  ,   I'm tired of and I say no  ,   and yeah  .  
Aha  .  
They haven't called me  ,   today  .    But  ,   but what makes me smile  ,   my husband  ,   is crazy  .  
Ah  ,   you also did this  ?  
yes  ,   but  ,   be before  .    Of  ,   of selling  .  
yes  .  
yes  ,   I couldn't do this kind of job  .    I can't  ,   I say to my husband  ,   you can't make me sell anything  ,   because I don't like selling things to people  ,   trying to sell people things  .  
I can't  .  
Sell  .  
And he works in sales  ?  
No  ,  and  ,   my husband works in  ,   eh  ,   computers  .  
Ah  ,   mm  .  
so  ,   that's what he  ,   he's trying to help me find a job  .   But  ,   and now no  ,   Are you washing dishes  ?  
No  ,   I'm just washing my hands  .  
Ah  ,   he just called me because I have a headache that is killing me  .   And  ,   he tells me  ,   Are you going to cook today  ,   or you want to cook today  ?   And I say no  .  
Ah  ,   thank you  ,   how nice  .  
yes  ,   and he ask me What do you want  ?   And I Say  ,   bring me anything  ,   because I can't think about what to eat right now with this headache  .  
No  ,   no  .   you want to cook  ?   Ah  ,   no  ,   well  ,   that doesn't bother you  ,   if they tell you  ,   you want to cook  ?   No  ,   no  ,   I don't want to cook  .   But  ,   What do you want to eat  ?   Ah  ,   whatever  ,   it doesn't matter  .  
Aha  .  
Okay  ,   but later  ,   Ah  ?  
yes  ,   my husband is the cook  .   My husband is the cook  .  
Really  ?  
He likes to cook  ,   he's an inventor  ,   I don't cook for Thanksgiving nor Christmas  ,   because I don't know how to make the turkey  .  
You  ,   you don't know to cook turkey  ?  
No  ,   my brother taught my husband how to cook turkey  ,   it makes me laugh  ,   so  ,   he's the one who cooks the turkey  .  
Really  ?  
And  ,   he's calm  ,   he doesn't say to me  ,   aye  ,   this year  ,   he says  ,   no  ,   what size am I going to buy  ?    and the inventions that he does with this turkey  ,   and in the end  ,   he knows well  .  
Aha  .  
I say  ,   thank god that I have a man like that  .  
Aye  ,  
Aha  .  
The work  .  
Aha  .  
Two  ,   that's it  .  
Twelve  ,  
Ah  ,   twelve  ,  
and the rest were trash  .  
Telemarketing
I say  ,   aye  ,   my god  ,   and my husband says  ,   man  ,   you get all these things that come out there  ?    And I say  ,   I say  ,   I say  ,   this is why  ,  
You will see  .   Is that  ,   when you get on the internet and they ask you for the email  .  
yeah  ,   is true  .  
hard  .  
I hate that  .   Well  ,   yes  .   Ah  ?  
What do you do  ?  
Surveys like this one  ,   but on the computer  .   Or sometimes  ,   my son does it  .  
That  ,   so  ,  
They pay me for the survey
mm  ,   me too  .  
Some  ,   not all  .  
Ah  ,   me too  ,   I still have it in the PayPal  ,   no  ,   no  ,   I haven't
and since I don't  ,   My husb 
I haven't cashed it  .  
my husband is the one who  ,   he takes it form there  ,   like giving me a bill  ,   and I laughed  ,   because he said it was for services given  ,   and I say  ,   what services did you give me for me to pay you  ?  
So  ,   he started laughing because he  ,   so  ,   because I didn't put my credit card  .    So  ,   he  ,  
he took it out  ,   he gave me a bill  ,   I say ok  ,   pay him  .  
Ah  ,   aha  .    Have you ever bought something on the internet  ?  
yes  ,   I like to buy things  ,   the majority  ,   some of the surveys that I do  ,   pay me with with Amazon  .  
Oh  ,   aha  .  
Certificates  .    So  ,   now I have like ninety eight dollars  ,   I told my husband  ,   okay  ,   someone will get something free for Christmas  .    I say  ,   less money for me  ,   to spend  .    So  ,  
The other month  ?  
Aha  .  
Oh  ,   so it's really flirty  .  
No  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   this is the other surgery  ,   that they told me  ,   I have to put  ,   I go to  ,  
O 
I'm looking for work  ,   and now I can't look for work because they told me that I have to stay in bed for two weeks  ,  
Aha  .  
I tell my husband  ,   ¿what job is gonna give me a month off when I'm just starting  ?  
Right  ,   and  ,   ¿what's that  ,   that surgery about  ?  
Oh  ,   i got some bumps  ,   near the ovaries
Right  ,   o well  ,   and  ,   ¿what's it's name  ?  
So  ,   uh huh  ,   i had a  ,   four  ,   uh  ,   four  ,   i mean  ,   six years ago
¿You see  ?    ,   uh huh
and when i went to the doctor  ,   he said i had six now
Oh
then my husband says "lets go  ,   do that now"
¿Dangerous  ?  
¿Huh  ?  
Are they dangerous
No
Dangerous  ,   ¿right  ?  
That  ,   he says it they aren't  ,   that's what he  ,   that's what gives me trouble when that time of the month comes
Right
Plenty of blood comes out
Oh
yes  ,   that  ,   and it bothers me a lot  .    So  ,   this is why
E 
I use too many tampons a month  .    So  ,   they told me  ,   the doctor tells me  ,   use use them too much  ,   he says  .    And the pain  ,   I say well  ,   I deal with it  ,   because I don't like to take medicine  .  
He says  ,   you're crazy  ,   woman  .  
And it hurts you  ?  
Aha  .    It hurts me a lot so  ,   he says that it's this  .    So  ,  
Oh  .    Because this happened to me to but well  ,   it's called endometrosis and yeah  ,   it happened a lot  ,   they're like grapes  ,   the doctor says  ,  
yes  ,   and I don't have tubes  ,   yeah  ,   they'll pay us for this call  ,   right  ?    They're going to pay us both for this call  .  
Yes  ,   I still have it  .    Ah  ,   sorry  ?    No  ,   yeah  ,   well  ,   yes  ,   telemarketing is really annoying  .    Yeah  ,   they'll pay us for this  ,   certainly  .  
Ah  ,   yeah  .  
Huh  ?  
I also like you  .    Talking  ,   like five times  ,   with this  .  
yes  ,   we keep talking  ,   yesterday I talked with a guy who does salsa
And what did he tell you  ?  
And I talked with him twice  .    And  ,   ah  ,   he's called Alex  .  
So  ,   you  ,   yes  ,   so if you take the call  ,   like this one at nine and night  ,   you'll call Alex  .  
Oh  ,   no  ,   that's very late  .  
No  .    What  ,   what time is it there in Seattle  ?  
Here it's also six  .  
He's in California  ?  
Aha  .  
No  ,   I will never take a call at nine at night  .  
From  ,   until ten  ?  
Hmm  .    Since I'm always awake until really late  ,   so  ,   I told them that they can call me until  ,  
oh  ,   aha  ,   my husband gets mad sometimes  ,   when they're calling and calling  .    And if you don't take it right then  ,   will they talk to you until midnight  ?    I say no  ,   no  ,   no  .  
Yeah  ,   because not at midnight  .  
Aha  .  
Give your  ,   give me your e mail now  ,   I will send you an e mail with mine  .  
ah  ,   OK  ,   Are you readi  ?  
Aha  ,   What  ?  
Are you ready  ?  
yes  .  
It's B
B as in burro  .  
It's Bennett  ,   yes  .   BE NN
BENN
ETT
ETT
and  ,   Do you know what an underscore is  ?  
AC
Aha  ,   the of  ,   so  ,   Tamara
TAMARA
aha  ,   at Hotmail  .  
Right  ,   oh  ,   ok  ,   so I'll give you mine
Well  ,   send me yours there
Oh  ,   no  ,   right now  ,   go  ,   get paper and pencil
Oh no  ,   so  ,   ¿you  ,   you  ?  
Before we run out of the ten minutes
Yes  ,   ¿did you put yourself there  ?    ,   ¿where you the one who told me that you put yourself on  ,   uh  ?  
Oh  ,   ¿where  ?  
Or it wasn't you  ?    ,   the list so they won't call you
¿Which list  ?  
The  ,   uh  ,   these people that calls you to sell you stuff
Oh  ,   no  ,   i  ,   i haven't signed to any  ,   any list
no  ,   oh
I didn't know there was a list
I think only here in the United States  .   It's just  ,   it's a list where you can get in  ,   and they don't  ,   they don't call you anymore
Right
But  ,   i don't know where you start to find this alleged list
No  ,   maybe  ,   uh  ,   call  ,   call the phone company  ,   ¿what is it  ?  
The telephone maybe
Right  ,   maybe they know
Right  ,   ok  ,   yeah i have heard that yeah  ,   you give your name  ,   your name and your phone and they don't send
Hello
Hello
yes
Good evening
Uh  ,   my name is Annie  ,   ¿what's your name  ?  
Oh  ,   my name is Jose  ,   ¿and you  ?  
Annie
Annie
Yes
Oh  ,   nice to meet you
¿Where are you calling from  ?  
Uh  ,   from Philadelphia
Oh  ,   i believe i have spoken to you previously
Oh  ,   yeah  ,   ¿where do you live  ?  
Miami
Um  ,   possibly  ,   yeah  ,   i don't know
You're from Spain  ,   ¿right  ?  
No  ,   no  ,   I'm from  ,   well  ,   half Guatemalan and half Cuban
Oh  ,   well then it wasn't you  ,   I'm sorry
No  ,   no  ,   no  ,   i don't think so  ,   yeah  ,   ¿what do you think about telemarketing  ?  
Ah  ,   I don't like it  .  
I think that no one likes it  .    With everyone I've talked to  ,   no one likes it  .    No  ,   but  ,   yes  ,   it's bothersome  ,   right  .  
Yes  ,   I've never understood the reason for this  .    Why do people call  ?    But
yes
apparently  ,   you know  ,   they make money because if not  ,   they wouldn't do it  ,   you know  ,   call so much  .  
yes  ,   yes  .    I don't know  ,   and luckily I have a cell phone and I don't give my number to any companies and  ,   this is why no one calls me  ,   but I'm lucky  ,  
eh  ,   for example in the residential houses  ,   where  ,   I imagine they get the numbers out of the phone books  ,  
yes
always  ,   they're always calling and calling  ,   I know that in the case of my mom  ,   she had  ,   yeah  ,   almost every day someone called selling something  .  
And one day she called the telephone company and they said that  ,   there was a service and with this service  ,   if the person called a number that wasn't identified  ,   if it wasn't identified  .  
so  ,   a recording came out saying that they didn't  ,   well accept numbers  ,   calls from  ,   from the number  ,   where the person hadn't identified themselves  ,   only if they  ,  
yes
say your name  .    So the company records the name and then they call you  ,   and ask if you want to accept the call  .  
yes
but the problem is that  ,   this requires a human to be on the other line  ,   but the thing is  ,   the majority of these calls  ,  
are done by computers  ,  
yes
And so well this never happens calls  ,   well  ,   it's very rare to get a call from telemarketing  .  
hmm
So it's fantastic  ,   it's fantastic  .    But it's really annoying  .  
mhm
And that person was not paying his bill  ,   so a lot of times  .  
yes
But and  ,   they kept on calling me and I can't do anything about it and that's what bothers me most
And they probably didn't believe you  ,   right  ,   they would think  ,   they don't want to pay and are just making up stories and
aha mhm
that's horrible
So  ,   you know  ,   I've called the phone company but  ,   since it's usually a one eight hundred number
mhm
they can't block the calls  .  
so  ,   we never called him back  ,   really  ,   because it wasn't for us  ,   we didn't know that person  ,   we thought that someone had previously had that same number  .   But  ,  
yes  ,   yes
But  ,   no  ,   it also happened to us one time as we are  ,   we used to live in Tennessee  ,   so  ,   oh  ,  
aha
Well  ,   the truth is that I don't know  ,   fifteen years  ,   a long time  ,   so  ,   oh  ,   not that much really  ,   ten years  ,   someone called  ,   it was a man from Tennessee
So  ,   he left a message in the phone  ,   it was like  ,  
mhm
oh  ,   oh  ,   it was like  ,   Joan I'm in the hospital and they never knew who Joan was or who the man was  ,   nn  ,   but sometimes we do get calls that
are kind of crazy  ,   but
We have also received calls from an inmate  .  
I  ,   I don't know you  ,   I'm not going to call you  ,   you know  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,  
yes
But you know  ,   to me  ,   the telemarketers  ,   I don't know how they make their money  ,   because I don't know anyone  ,   anyone who has bought something  ,  
You know  ,   what they're selling  .  
yes
And  ,   and even less the spam that they send you  .  
yes  ,   but also  ,   not so much with telemarketing but with spam  .  
yes
The person has the list already  .   They make their message  ,   they send it to the computer  ,   and send it and send it  .   It takes
But it is incredible  ,   it is incredibly cheap  ,   sending all that  ,   because before  ,   hundred years ago for instance  ,   there were not such messages  ,   right  ?   but now everything is so cheap
it is rubbish  ,   a waste of time  ,   because before  ,   imagine when you had to write letters by hand  ,   the only messages sent were important things  ,   right  ?  
yes
Nowadays  ,   anything  .   Sending costs nothing  ,   right  ?  
yes
No  ,   I mean  .   But we have never bought anything of spam or telemarketing
mm
To the trash  .  
yes
to all the companies on the internet and there they get  ,   yes thousands of spam messages every month  ,   right  .  
yes
But  ,   and  ,   and what I don't understand with hotmail is that for example I create an address that I didn't give anyone  ,   anyone  ,   an address that I created  ,   and never used  ,   but  ,  
there I returned a while later  ,   and already  ,   I had started receiving spam messages
mm
And I don't know from where  ,   is that  ,   in some way  ,   I don't know with hotmail in some way  .   They find the address of people  .  
aha
Because there are so many people in hotmail that  ,   that can pick messages randomly  ,   like that  ,   or emails randomly almost  .  
yes
But I don't know how  ,   but they already had the number  ,   the address of  ,   of this address that never already I don't know how they found it  ,   I don't know  .  
yes and
And now  ,  
aha  ,   it continues
and  ,   and I say that now it has become harder  .   um For the scammers in the United States and now there is more spamming that  ,   that
is very hard finding them  .  
oh is  ,   almost like  ,   I think that it is  ,   finding a code  ,  
aha
but then  ,   on the basis of  ,   of being like that like no  ,   no  ,   I really don't know  ,   but a bunch of mathematics combinations of  ,   of  ,   of  ,   no  ,   no I don't exactly understand right  ,   but then  ,  
this process requires a certain amount of time  ,   right  ?  
aha
and then the thing is that when the computer does this process  ,   the message has a  ,   like a certificate that  ,   that the computer made this process to send the message
So  ,   the thing is that if the person  ,   let's suppose it's you who writes it  ,   you write an email  ,   then you send it  .   It is so short  ,  this process  ,   that you don't even notice  ,   and you send it  ,   and that's it  ,   right  ?  
mhm
But  ,   if you are sending thousands of emails  ,   the process is done while sending the thousands and thousands
Hello  ?  
Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   how are you  ?    Fine  ,   thanks  ,   thanks  .  
I'm Paulina  ,   with whom am I speaking  ?  
Ah  ,   Vicente  .    I'm Vicente and from  ,   from  ,   where are you from  ,   Paulina  ?  
From Chile  ,   and you  ?  
From Chile  ,   I'm from Panama  .  
From Panama  .  
yes  ,   but in what  ,   in what state are you living now  ?  
In Georgia
In Georgia  .  
And you  ?  
I  ,   I'm in New York
Didn't we talk yesterday  ?  
Ah  ?  
Didn't you talk with me yesterday  ?  
That's what I was thinking  .    We talked yesterday  .  
yes  ,   and it was the same topic
Eh  ,   was it yesterday or the day before  ?    I talked with  ,   with a Spanish woman too  ,   I don't remember exactly  .  
Ah  ,   I don't know  ,   I think that it was yesterday  .  
And what an  ,   eh  ,   and
Ah  ,   yes  ,   you were talking about the
of
Carlos Fuentes  .  
of telemarketing that you don't buy from many people when they call or something like that  .  
yes  ,   yesterday  .  
yes  ,   oh  ,   boy
And  ,   we finished the conversation with Carlos Fuentes that if you wanted to talk with someone  ,   I don't know what  ,   that didn't speak with Latins with someone cultured or I don't know what
Oh  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   eh  ,   yes that you asked me about  ,   about Fuente's first name
It was Carlos  ,   right  ?   Carlos Fuentes  ?  
Ah  ?   I don't remember the first name  ,   but a  ,   a library or bookstore and that they sell ah books in Spanish
yes  .  
and then you tell them of Fuentes  ,   eh from Mexico  ,   perhaps they have the book of the author because he  ,   he is  ,   he is  ,   he's intelligent  ,   he says the
he says that the Latins speak with a lot of emotion
Ah  ,   yes  .  
instead of with the head  .  
AH  .  
Understand  ?  
yes  .  
They say things that you can't believe  ,   eh  ?  
yes  ,   no  ?  
yes  ,   that  ,   that he uses is when one when Latins come to the United States  ,   eh and they forget how they lived before in their country  .  
And and this is ten thousand times more advanced to what they had in their country  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   he says things like that  ,   he  ,   he  ,   eh  ,   he says no  ,   he's crazy  ,   eh
How old is Carlos Fuentes  ,   more or less  ?  
What  ?  
How old would he be  ?  
Me  ,   me  ?  
No  ,   him  ,   Carlos Fuen 
And  ,   he  ,   he has to be at least sixty  ,   something  ,   fifty  ,   something like that  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   eh  ,   I don't know  ,   I don't know  ,   I haven't heard much about him lately  ,   you know but
He's a little old already  .  
ah  ,   yes  ,   eh  ,   old  ,   yes  ,   a little old
Aha  .  
eh  ,   is of  ,   is of the eh  ,   well  ,   in Mexico the majority of the Mexicans are mixed race  ,   with Indians  ,   eh  ?  
Aha  .  
But the ones that are in power are more Europeans  .  
Eh  ,   With  ,   eh  ,   exactly  ,   all Latin America  .  
and  ,   and many of those who are in
Very racist  .  
yes  ,   also  .  
They're Jewish  ,   they're  ,   people think that the leaders are only American and European but there are Jews  ,   eh  ,   in Spain  ,   who speak Spanish  ,   you know  ?  
No  ,   yes  ,   there are Jews everywhere
yes  ,   yes  ,   well everywhere  ,   yes  ,   in Spanish  .  
German  ,   ah  ,   yes  ?  
and many Italians  .  
yes  ,   Argentinians too  .  
And  ,   and the  ,   eh  ,   in Cuba  ,   right  ?  
yes  .  
Those who had power  ,   those who  ,   who were controlling Cuba before Fidel was there  ,   right  ?    It was a cura  a Cuban  ,   ah
Cubans  ,   ah  ,   who are Jewish
yes  ,   I didn't know
that con  ,   that controlled everything and ra   ,   the reset of the people didn't have anything  .   Well  ,   we have to t   ,   we have to talk about telemarketing and that  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,  
And h 
eh
Well  ,   what I must say  ,   the day before eh
It's  ,   it's the same topic  ,   no  ?  
I to   ,   I you yes  ,   yes it's the same topic  ,   ah I  ,   I  ,   I to   ,   I told you that they have a list that the government has right  ?  
that you could place your
Ah  ,   did you get into the list already  ?  
No  ,   I yes   ,   I bu   ,   I  ,   and when it came out last year  ,   I think it came out  ,   that the b   ,   the government was open  ,   the list  ,   and that you cou 
man   ,   you can call a  ,   a  ,   you call  ,   right  ?   a  ,   a  ,   a phone call of  ,   of eight hundred  ,   you know it's from the government  ,   and you enter your phone number
And they don't bother you  .  
and they can't call you to sell you things they can call you if you owe them chavo  ,  
If you what  ?  
If you owe them money  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   but po   ,   to tell you that you come ah  ,   that I want to sell you this or that I want you to come to this  ,   ah  ,   to this di   ,   that you buy this  ,   they can't do that
Eh  ,   and what did you say  ?   if you owe them chavos  ?   Is that way you said  ?  
yes  ,   you owe them money  ,   they can call you  ,   it's different  .  
OK  ,   no  ,   to learn the  ,   the
Po   ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   I did one
eh  ,   'chavo'  ,   aha  ,   is that Panamas or where is it from  ?  
No  ,   a 'chavo'  ,   'chavo' because 'chavo' means money  ,   or 'plata' we say 'plata'
yes
'Plata' and money  ,   pesos
No  ,   how interesting  ,   I   ,  I   ,   I would like to learn how they speak in other countries
In other countries
yes
yes  ,   it is like  ,   I was talking to an Ecuadorean  ,   you know the banana  ,   right  ?  
yes
Ah  ,   the  ,   the one you fry and eat  ,   the banana
yes
In Ecuador  ,   in Ecuador they call them 'maduros'
'Maduros'  ,   I see  ,   we in Chile call 'platano' to the banana  .   Bananas  ,   how you call it  ?    ,   the English banana
E  No  ,   no  ,   there are bananas and plantains  ,   they are different
e  yes  ,   no  ,   I know they are different  ,   but in Chile there are no plantains and bananas  ,   there are just plantains
Do you call banana both of them  ?  
We call them both plantains  ,   to bananas
You call plantains the bananas  ?  
yes  ,   because there's only one  ,   and we call it plantain  .   I learned there were bananas when
Oh  .  
I knew a friend from  ,   from Ecuador and  ,   when one leaves their country you learn many things also  .  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   well yes because in Panama  ,   we we called the plantains  ,   plantains and we called the banana  ,   banana or banana
Okay
ah  ,  eh you call it bananas also or not  ?  
No  ,   we just called it bananas  ,   because we only have that yellow one
Ah  .  
that that they call here banana  .  
Eh  ,   that  ,   eh  ,   that Oh  ,   eh  ,   that is what
We don't have the little ones nor the bigger ones  .  
that is that  ,   like a fruit  ,   the bananas are eaten  ,   the bananas are eaten like a  ,   like a fruit  ,   while the eh
The plantains are eaten fried  ,   yes  .  
the plantains  ,   are cooked  .   You fry them or  ,   they can be cooked green or something like that eh  .  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   see  ?  
That can be done too  ,   to me  ,   when  ,   in Ecuador they call it ripe  .   And how ripe  ,   what is ripe  ?   And  ,   they showed me a banana  ,   and I said  ,   that's not a banana  ,   eh  ?  
But one learns a lot when  ,   like you say  ,   when one leaves their country  .   Is the same that in  ,   ah  ,   here we have the ah
Puerto Ricans that call  ,   ah well  ,   you  ,   can call it beans
yes
in Mexico they call them beans  .  
In Chile we call it beans  .  
Ah  ,   yes  ?  
These are the red ones  ,   right  ?    The big red ones  .  
Ah  ,   no  ,   for us porotos is like generic  ,   yes  .  
All  ,   You all  ,   you all say 
There's the red poroto  ,   the white ones  ,   they're  ,   the sabas that are bigger  ,   white  .  
Yeah  .  
Cubans all with the  ,   with the beans  ,   the black habichuela is what they use  ,   the Cubans use a lot and the Mexicans use pintos  ,   they use pintos a lot
Yeah  ,   yes  .  
yes  .  
Corn you call it  ,   yes  ,   we say choclo  .  
It's called corn  .  
Oh  ,   yeah  ?  
And the avocado  ,   we call it avocado  .  
Okay  ,   but there are certain things that are  ,   languages that are not appropriate  ,   but when you are listening  ,   eh  ,   to some news they use  ,   try to use words that are appropriate  .  
For the countries more  ,   eh
Understand  ?  
in Central America  ,   in Argentina  ,   Chile  ,   Uruguay we use more similar words  ,   put on your corn is more of the Indians from the south of  ,   of
Yeah that's Indian  ,   corn is of the Indians  ,   yes yes  .  
Sure  .  
Eh  ,   eh  ,   because in Panama we use more correct Spanish  ,   which is possible because Panama is very universal  ,   understand  ?   There are  ,   are many people from all parts of the world in Panama  ,   there are  ,   are  ,   are  ,  
Cubans  ,   there are Chileans  ,   there are people from all  ,   from all parts of Latin America come to  ,   to Panama  .  
yes  ,  a  ,   a  ,   yes  ,   exactly  ,   the Spanish in Panama is more general eh  ,   is more correct  ,   what it says in the book  ,   because they have to talk a  ,   from different parts  ,   understand  ?   of the world  .  
Mm  ,  
Because many people there go there by ships and work for a ship eh and  ,   and when they want to leave their country they  ,   how do you call it  ?   jump ship
Aha  .  
Jump ship  ,   they leave the ship  ,   hide in Panama and stay there for the rest of their life
Oh  ,   really  ?  
yes   ,  yes  ,   there is immigration  ,   after some time  ,   they come and become Panamanian and when you are Panamanian it's easier  ,   before was easier to come to the United States
Before  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   it was very easy to come to the United States  ,   because remember  ,   Panama is like a colony of the Unites States
They bought the Channel
You know hat I mean  ?   yes  ,   the channel and everything the channel means  ,   eh  ,   Panama is a creation of the United States
Mhm
You know what I mean  ?   The currency in Panama was  ,   eh  ,   the currency in Pa   ,   eh  ,   eh  ,   is the United States's currency and it has always been  ,   banks  ,   eveything is from the United States
It's rather a colony  ,   it's like a colony of the United States  ,    they think they are an independent country  ,   but they aren't independent  ,   see  ?  
They depend a lot on the United States
yes
And  ,   Fuentes says it often  ,   people there don't know it is better learning from the United States athn from your own country
because if the United States want to  ,   they will cause you problems  ,   if the United States want to  ,   they can kill your government and so
That's right  ,   the United States can kill any government  ,   people there  ,   in Latin America  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes and they have done it  ,   yes
yes  .   They have a great influence
A greta one  ,   the  ,   the dictators there used to be
yes  ,   that's how they do their businesses  ,   they
yes   ,  yes  ,   very dirty affairs before  ,   the United States say stop or leave  ,   and they have to stop
because they rule  ,   that's what Fuentes says  ,   and people can't believe it  ,   but he is right  ,   in that
in that matter  ,   eh  ,   but we have to talk about telemarketing telemarketing there's telemarketing now that call you in Spanish also  .  
yes  .  
yes  .  
yes  ,   my sister worked once  ,   like that  ,   ah  ,   they send the people
Aha  ,   yes  ,   I  ,   I did that for a while too  ,   for a short time  ,   yes  .  
Ah  ,   really  ?   what  ,   what did you sell  ?  
I  ,   I work for Sprint
Oh  .  
you know  ,   Sprint the one of the cellular  .  
Mm  ,   of telephone  .  
yes  ,   and what did you and what  ,   eh  ,   but before  ,   before there was of long distance  ,   eh Now  ,   ah  ?  
Of long distance  ,   yes  .   Of long distance  .  
no  ,   if you have a cell phone that's the nicest thing about the cell phone that if you are calling a person in Colorado  ,   in California  ,   right  ?  
that is the same as making a call  ,   a local call  .  
Ah  ?  
It depends on the plan that you have  .  
Eh  ,   of  ,   all the plans  ,   all the plans are the same  ,   all the plans the distance now in the  ,   in the United States no  ,   it does not exist when you have a cell phone
Do you understand  ?   it cost the same to call to California that calling a person that  ,   that that  ,   lives three  ,   three blocks from you  ,   from the place you live  .  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   How long did you worked at Sprint  ?  
Well Sprint ah  ,   I worked for a short  ,   I worked only for oh  ,   around four or five months  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .  
I had free time  ,   and wanted to make some money but for a time  ,   eh  ,   poor little thing Do you understand  ?   and I talked to people  ,   from Sprint eh  ,   Sprint distance
And how do they do the selling  ?   They call  ,   How do they get the names  ?  
They have  ,   have a list  .  
yes  ,   but
Sometimes  ,   sometimes  ,   sometimes you can  ,   eh  ,   make the list of names  ,   sometimes they have a machine that gives you the names automatically  .   And  ,   eh  ,   sometimes not  ,   they have  ,   sometimes they have a list
and a computer  ,   right  ?   when you sit down right  ?   when you sit down you have to put a
Hi
Hello  ,   yes
Hi  ,   I'm Salma from Texas  ,   well
Oh  ,   that's good  ,   because i was about to hang up
Oh  ,   ¿yes  ?  
It's the first time I'm making a call so i didn't know what to expect  ,   ¿where are you from  ?  
Right  ,   uh  ,   from Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico  ,   that's good
Uh huh  ,   uh huh  ,   and you sound like you're from Argentina or Chile
from Chile  ,   of course
You're Chilean
Yes  ,   it shows  ,   our tone rats us out  .   And  ,   ¿is it the first time you call too  ?  
No  ,   no  ,   this is my fifth call
Oh  ,   and  ,   ¿could you tell me a little bit of what's this about  ?  
Oh  ,   well  ,   uh  ,   every day there's a different subject
Yeah
So  ,   they basically give us twelve minutes to talk about that subject
oh  ,   OK
And they're studying linguistics  ,   so i believe they're comparing different accents like  ,   how we speak  ,   people from different parts of Latin America
Oh  ,   perfect  ,   oh  ,   so we have to talk about the subject  ,   ¿is it telemarketing  ?  
mhm  ,   okay  ,   telemarketing and the spam
what is spam  ?  
there are many companies that only send you emails to fill up your inbox  .  
your inbox in your email
oh yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   so then we need to have a talk about that  ?  
yes  ,   we need to talk about the sells  ,   tv  ,   and cell phones as well  .  
okay
you can write down the telephone number so that way they do not call you again  .  
oh  ,   yes  ,   I have a caller ID
okay
It is connected to the telephone
mhm
unknow number  ,   it´s always sales people so you leave a message telling them not to call you anymore  .  
oh  ,   okay  .   yes
but you need to always see the caller ID
okay  ,   okay
Well  ,   maybe
yes  ,   of course
okay
the government sets all the lists of the different people that calls sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn´t
it worked for me  ,   I put my name there on the list
yes
and  ,   after like thirty forty days I just received one call
oh  ,   and which is that list  ,   I mean  ,   how does one apply for that  ?  
the list is on the internet and basically you register you telephone number  .  
okay
and then they send you an email and you have to confirm through the email they send you and after that they give the companies like forty days to remove you from
from their lists and after that if any company calls you eh  ,   you can sue
ah  ,   how good  ,   I'm going to do it then  ,   and that I look for it on the internet through who
mm  ,   mm yes  ,   ah  ,   I don't remember the  ,   the address also go to a search engine like google or something like that
okay
and put there eh  ,   do not call list
ah  ,   and there it comes out
there it will come out  ,   yes
and is that only for the telephone calls or can it also be used for the  ,   the interne  the no  ,   email  ?  
no  ,   is only for the telephone calls  ,   that's one of the questions that it said there that  ,   that we should talk about that  ,   that if we believe that something like that should exist for the email also
no  ,   of course that yes  ,   because   ,   isn't it true  ?  
yes  ,   yes mm
everyday you open the email  ,   and like twenty five or more emails that shouldn't be there come out
yes yes  ,   yes
like that you don't want  ,   ah
yes there are some  ,   some companies  ,   for example my  ,   eh  ,   I have a school email that  ,   this usually doesn't happen
and they have some really specific filters on the  ,   the school email
yeah
but I also have a yahoo address  ,   and yahoo also has a lot of really good filters
ah
ah  ,   and so everything the think that's spam
yeah
ah  ,   they send them  ,   to a different folder so if you want to go to this folder and look over things  ,   you have to determine if you want to read the messages they sent or not
ah  ,   but many times also
yeah
eh  ,   when you sign that you want to receive  ,   I don't know  ,   emails from a theater or from a story  ,   what you want to receive
ah
they also send those there  ,   because those e mails are also sent en masse  .  
sure
and so the  ,   the program can't determine  ,   so it would be good  ,   I think it would be good if there were this kind of thing also for the internet because
of course 
you wouldn't have to be looking on the whole list of all the emails that you're not interested in to find what you want
sure  ,   exactly yes  ,   eh  ,   yeah
hmm yes so  ,   have you ever had a problem  ,   have they sold you something that hasn't been
and l 
you haven't asked for something  ,   that has come
yes  ,   yes precisely  ,   a little while ago I bought a  ,   I can't remember what it was  ,   but it was a  ,   no  ,   I do remember  ,   I bought some slimming pills
mhm
through the telephone
mhm
I see  ,   so  ,   I got them and they said that you had a certain period of time to send them back for a refund and I sent them back the same day when I got them cause I decided not to take them  .  
so  ,   I sent them back that same day through the mail  .  
mhm
I see  ,   the problem was that  ,   they said they never got them
mm
and  ,   and  ,   they said that I didn't return them in time  ,   or they said that I didn't send them back before the end of the guarantee period  ,   I was able to solve it
yes  ,   sure
that has been the only time  ,   I used to buy some herbs
mhm
I see  ,   herbs remedies  ,   homeopathic medicines  ,   all those kinds of things but I've never had a problem with that  .  
mm
Have you bought stuff  ?  
no  ,   I have never  ,   when I get telemarketing calls I immediately  ,   before they even start talking I'd hang up and not listen to what they had to say
I would immediately tell them that I was not interested and I'd hang up the phone  .  
I see
but  ,   but yes  ,   I've had problems with  ,   with my credit card
oh  ,   really  ?  
they also call you once in a while to offer you some product  ,   which is not specifically theirs but promoted by them  ,   and it was  ,   ah  ,   something to
oh  ,   I had to get information about my credit or something like this  ,   ans most of the times  ,   eh  ,   when I get call from  ,   I don't know  ,   my telephone company or
my credit card company  ,   and there is a period to try the product and see whether you like it  ,   I usually say yes  ,   because  sometimes they give you a
part of  ,   the person who is doing the call earns money depending on how many people accepts
sure  ,   sure
so  ,   I tell them yes  ,   for them to have their account  ,   nd eh  ,   and this time they told me they would call me back if I wanted to keep the product
after the thirty day try period
I see
and they never called  ,   so I thought they had cancelled it
I see
and then I got  ,   I got charged for the service  ,   so I called them and told them I was absolutely sure that the person told me they would call me back to see whether I wanted to go on with the product  ,   right  ?    ,   that I would get a call to cancel the product because otherwise I would have said no  ,   because then I forget
aha  ,   that they would call you back  ,   I see
yes  ,   so  ,   I couldn't believe that  ,   that my credit cared  ,   which is a reliable company
because  ,   if your credit card would have done something like that
sure
at the end  ,   the ended up cancelling the charge  ,   but  ,   even so  ,   you have to suffer the bad situation of calling and arguing with the person
sure  ,   and prove them  ,   somehow  ,   that you are right  ,   don't you  ?  
sure  ,   yes  ,   yes
sure  ,    yes  ,   is very complicated  ,   the other thing is that it's scary because I think that any person has access  ,   eh  ,   isn't it true  ?  
mm
because you send your card to a part where you want to buy I don't know  ,   a camera a video and then it turns out that you receive offers from different stores in other words  ,   business
of electronics  ,   then they say well and nothing  ,   I haven't said anything
mm mm  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   and you the know the other problem I  ,   that the lady that was talking  ,   because eh  ,   since those days they had the same topic  ,   and I was talking with a lady and  ,   and
and I told her  ,   what happens is that there's a lot of these companies that what they do  ,   they sell the information
sure
I mean  ,   you buy any product today and no and no  ,   you don't even know that your information can be sold because eh  ,   they have  ,   by law  ,   the right to sell your information
sure  ,   they pass it to others
so  ,   then I think they should pass laws that were much more strict and that it would not be possible for someone to sell your information to other companies
exactly  ,   only if you want to and it affects that  ,   sure  ,   but if not
mm sure
the privacy before anything  ,   right  ?  
mm  ,   mm
where you send an email and  ,   like an infinite amount  ,   eight hundred emails   ,   infinite amount we say the
yes  ,  
Chileans  ,   right  ?   instead of eight hundred infinite amount and one that doesn't correspond that doesn't even have any idea of who they are
yes  ,   yes no and the problem is that also many of these companies that buy the information yes
okay
ah  ,   they look for people who are vulnerable  ,   people who don't
exactly  ,   who believe in everything they say
yes yes  ,   and  ,   and  ,   and  ,   also since they're not so used to hundreds of companies calling every day  ,   many times there are companies that are fake and then
what they do
do you know  ,   what happened to me a while ago  ,   ah  ,   I already knew  ,   that they called on the telephone  ,   saying that it was your credit card
hmm
yeah  ?    And that it was your company  ,   etcetera  ,   so they said that there had been a charge
hmm
that was unjustified on your card for  ,   eh  ,   a lot of money  ,   like many three hundred dollars  ,   and they wanted to corroborate if you had made this charge
so  ,   eh you say  ,   eh  ,   the person answered and said  ,   no  ,   I didn't make this charge  .    yeah  ?    and so they said good  ,   and your number  ,   like  ,   you number is such and such  ,   your address
is such and such  ,   social security is such and such  ,   the person says  ,   okay  ,   and your credit card number is this  ,   he said  ,   yeah  ?  
hmm
like  ,   you were convinced that the company was really calling you for your credit card  ,   yeah  ?  
hmm
they said  ,   the only thing we need to corroborate is on the back of your card there are four numbers
hmm  ,   hmm
yeah  ?    can you give us this number to confirm that you're the person who hasn't made this charge  ?  
hmm
so the person after everything  ,   that this supposed company
hmm
I already knew here  ,   she said  ,   my numbers are such and such and with that she was doing a fraud
mm
okay  ?   and the person would say well  ,   then we are going to take from your payment that you haven't made too grateful  ,   bla  ,   bla  ,   and bye and then the person would find that
at the time  ,   ah no  ,   and also they give them a name and a number where it said  ,   eh  ,   I'm I don't know  ,   Jimenez or a person
mm
already of visa  ,   and this is your reference number and call back if you have any doubts
mm
and they give them a number in the visa  ,   okay  ?   the number where they have to call
mm
so generally the people don't call
mm
but this person called and found out that such a thing didn't exist
mm
okay  ?   and then he notified that in all this process  ,   that half an hour already passed  ,   already they had used his card  ,   for more than one thousand dollars
wow
imagine that  ,   so
yes  ,   yes no yes no  ,   they invent many things and and besides that since they have so much information is very hard to know who is official and who is not official
sure  ,   sure  ,   yes good
mm
Good morning  ,   good evening
Good morning  ,   good evening  ,   ¿how are you  ?  
¿Who  ?    ,   I'm Carmen from Chicago  ,   ¿who are you  ?  
Yeah  ,   Ernestina  ,   Ernestina
Oh  ,   ¿from where  ?  
New York
Ok  ,   you know  ,   I'm fine  ,   i'm in Chicago  ,   but i'm from Puerto Rico
¿And you  ?    ,   oh  ,   that's good
Right  ,   yeah I've been married for thirty years
Oh
¿and you  ?  
thirty years
yes
Wow  ,   yeah  ,   i have a husband  ,   [we've been married for / he's] twenty years
¿and you  ?    ,   wow
oh  ,   oh  ,   oh
Look  ,   ¿do you know today's subject  ?  
yes
it's about telemarketing and spam
yeah
is it the first time that you're speaking here  ,   or not  ?  
Well I don't know
no  ,   but  ,   um  ,   have you participated with other people  ?  
yes
oh okay  ,   because I've participated with many people  ,   but you're the first new one to come out  .  
you no  ,   um  ,   I've participated maybe seven
okay  ,   I have fifteen
oh wow
look  ,   I'm going to talk to you about telemarketing okay
okay
Look  ,   I get calls from telephone companies
ah
to get the offer for five cents a minute  .    And they  ,   for the long distance  ,   they tell you about long distance  ,   and after they change from five minutes  ,   they change to eight  ,   and after they change to fifteen  ,   and so it keeps going up
aha wow
You can't believe it  ,   so they also call me for the telephone  ,   they call me to talk with the person in charge of the telephone
aha
Always  ,   always  ,   every day  ,   they call me twenty four hours a day  .  
oh yeah
So I tell them that he's never there  ,   that he's never there and when  ,   the  ,   the other day
aha
they start again in the morning  ,   they call often to talk with the person responsible for the phone  .   Because they want you to get offers by phone if you want to change company  .  
and they give you endless explanations why you should change companies  .  
aha yes
I let the answering machine answer  ,   when I come from work my answering machine is all full plus the id caller also full
oh boy wow
the other day they changed the te  the telephone company changed the number without
oh yeah
without giving me  ,   without me giving them  ,   without me give them permission  ,  
aha
and ah  ,   they call me a lot so that I apply for credit cards  ,   insurance credit  ,   well for many things  .  
yes wow
a lot  ,   a lot  ,   a lot Then also they send me many letters in the mail  ,   the mail gets completely full because I have a mailbox in my house and I also have a post office box
aha oh boy
They both get full of letters  ,   junk letters
oh no
And you  ?  
I don't have too much problem with that
aha
You know  ,   maybe  ,   maybe  ,   twice a week  ,   just that  .  
aha  ,   aha
they do not call often
they never call
no  ,  
they don´t call me during the whole week
oh
during the seven days they don´t call
no
wow  ,   you are lucky
they don´t call you very often
you are very lucky
maybe to check my credit but that´s it
you are lucky because they call me every day  ,   every hour
oh  ,   no wow and your number is different
I have changed my number but they found out the new one
oh wow
so now I have a email for the junk mail  ,   and I have another one for the important emails
wow
yes sometimes you have to do that
oh no
so then I will call to see if I had gotten any calls
aha
so they don't keep bothering me  ,   that they call someone else  ,   they don't keep bothering me  .  
wow
so this spam doesn't bother me because I don't use the computer at all  .  
yeah me too  ,   I don't
so  ,   but my daughter uses it and she says that sometimes she gets up to fifty spams and has to be erasing  ,   erasing  ,   erasing
oh
so that the important ones that she needs can come in  .  
aha wow
many  ,   many  ,   many
yeah
but more it's this  ,   the junk cards that send you insurance papers  ,   so that
oh yeah
if the banks want you to be a member  ,   many  ,   many things  .    a lot
where do you live in Chicago  ?  
and  ,   and in Chicago  ,   yes
oh  ,   is it cold today  ?  
no  ,   it's ok  ,   it went down to seventy two
eighty two
seventy two
oh oh here
but last week it was at sixty
yes here also sixty and maybe sixty four  ,   I don't know  .  
uh
the same
but there in New York is not so cold right  ,  
yes
but not  ,   not like here in Chicago
no  ,   but is windy is very windy
aha  ,   aha  ,   aha
ah you have daughters and sons too  ?  
yes  ,   yes I have a twenty eight year old daughter and a twenty six year old son
oh oh and I have a daughter she's twenty eight
aha
yes just that  ,   I have  ,   have one
oh  ,   a daughter
a  ,   a daughter yes
aha  ,   oh  ,   oh
yeah  ,   And where does your daughter live now  ,   she lives with you  ?  
yes she lives with me  ,   she's sleeping
oh oh
Because here in Chicago it's ten thirty at night  .  
wow
and there in New York  ,   what time is it  ?  
eh  ,   eleven thirty
oh  ,   an hour later than here  .  
yeah  ,   oh yeah
look so you're lucky because they don't call you on the phone or anything
yeah
and  ,   and you don't get letters in the mailbox either
ah
junk mail or anything
no
for  ,   like for  ,   credit cards or  ,   for  ,   for you to apply for
not many
for insurance or something
not many
or banks or anything
no
wow you're lucky  ,   how do you do it  ?  
oh  ,   oh  ,   oh  ,   oh  ,   that's not good
no  ,   no
oh  ,   oh  ,   oh
because  ,   just figure  ,   you want to have
they call you every day
every day  ,   seven days a week  ,   I get called
wow
and they leave me messages in the machine  ,   they leave the numbers in the message identifier  ,   once they didn't talk on the machine but yet they left me a number in the message identifier
oh yes
and I came and called back to see who it was
aha
and it was a company of magazine's subscriptions
aha  ,   oh  ,   yes
to subscribe with them  ,   that they would send me five for free and afterwards I would start paying
aha  ,   oh no
and I said no  ,   I am not interested  ,   call later or don't call at all  ,   but they keep calling  ,   I don't know what to do
What did you do for them not to bother you more  ?  
oh  ,   oh  ,   oh  ,   that's not good
no
oh  ,   no  ,   I don't have those problems
But  ,   ¿what did you do so they wouldn't bother you on the phone  ?    ,   or  ,   or send junk mail to your house
No  ,   no  ,   no  ,   uh  ,   no  ,   i don't have a problem with that
they don't even send you letters when children get lost or anything  ?  
letters too  ,   letters too
letters too
jo
lett 
from  ,   uh  ,   from where  ?  
they send me letters from everywhere
wow
yes
oh no
And they send me papers about the children who are missing  ,   a lot  ,   a lot  ,   a lot
Right  ,   oh yeah
Right
Oh  ,   and ¿did you change your number  ?  
the phone number  ,   i have changed it three times already
Yeah  ?    ,   wow
but i don't know how they get my
wow
the last  ,   the last letter I got is when I turned fifty  ,   they told me that I had to apply for life insurance
aha aha
because I turned fifty and  ,   you know  ,   what I do  ,   I put it in the disposal
aha
so that  ,   so they didn't come back to bother me again
wow
But a girl told me last night who was talking with me  ,   that her grandmother makes her rip up letters
ah
she does it in the tra  in the same envelope and she sends them back to them  .  
wow
yeah
oh boy
this means that they shouldn't bother you  ,   no  .  
ah  ,   ah
because there's a saying that says that for a good understanding  ,   few words are enough  .  
oh no
because they don't understand  ,   they don't understand in any way  .  
wow
tell me what you did so they didn't send you anything  ?  
not  ,   not much
But how did you do it  ?  
ah just  ,   just with a letter of credit  ,   just that
aha
eh  ,   no of maybe
aha
maybe two two  ,   three maybe two or three uh maybe two or three times a week
aha
but just that  ,   you say ah no  ,   no  ,   I don't want to
aha Well for me is Monday  ,   Tuesday  ,   Wednesday  ,   Thursday  ,   Saturday and Sunday  ,   no  ,   they don't wait  ,   they don't wait that it's Sunday that there's no mail to send me letters  .  
Sunday also
Sunday also  ,   I don't know how they do it I don't know and the other time they called me that I had won a car
ah wow
from two thousand six in two thousand five still  .  
oh
and  ,   and it was  ,   it was so that I would give a  ,   a so that I would call them  ,   so that like that they  ,   to waste the phone it had to be  .  
aha aha
so that the bill would come bigger  .   That I had  ,   then also they send me a lot of sweepstake letters  .   They don't send you  ?  
wow oh yeah
aha  ,   they don't send you  ,   they do send me a lot of sweepstake letters that I won
no
Hello
Hello
How are you  ?   My name is Auria  .  
What's your name  ?  
Auria  .  
Auria  ?  
Yes
I'm Pilar  .  
Pilar
Pilar  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   hello  ,   nice to meet you  .  
Nice to meet you too  ,   oh
And  ,   where are you calling from  ?  
From New York
Oh  ,   okay  ,   well  ,   I'm calling from Atlanta and it seems to me  ,  
mhm
that I  ,   I'm sorry  ,   I'm trying to get into my apartment but it seems to me that I forgot the door key  .  
Wow
the  ,   gate
Well  ,   mm  ,   what was I going to say  ?   Oh  ,   yes  ,   today's subject is politics  ,   isn't it  ?  
yes exactly
You  ,   understand a lot about politics  ,   or not  .  
I honestly don't  .   no  .   I don't want to say that I don't care too much about it but I don't  ,  
You don't follow it much  ,   ah  .  
I don't follow it much  ,   exactly  .  
well  ,   I do follow politics a little but from my country  ,   not this country  ,   in the United States but I haven't been here that long like to understand the politics here much  .  
The only thing I say is that I'm a democrat  ,   but the truth is  ,   that I don't trust the politicians too much it doesn't matter what party they belong to  .  
yes on that we agree They are not to be trusted not ones nor the others  ,   nor the others from there  .  
yes exactly  .  
The experience is that all the parties already that have the power  .  
exactly
Do something bad  ,   they always end up messing up in one thing or another  .  
And well they are liars it hurts me to say it  ,   but the truth is that they  ,   they are more concerned with their own interests  ,   and businesses  ,   and contracts  .  
yes
And scramble with the  ,   with the law according to what they need politically  .  
yes
And not according to what's best for  ,   You know  ,   the people  .  
sure  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes Is true  ,   the times in which the  ,   the people voted and lived the politics so much because they thought that they could improve their lives  .  
because they believed the promises of the politicians that  ,   that the country  ,   was going to improve the country  ,   the conditions were going to improve  .   Those times have already passed because very few people believe already  ,   I  .  
yes
I think that people don't believe them  ,   they vote because they have to  ,   or you usually have a preference  ,   not
yes
because you really think it will mean a big change
Exactly  ,   I always vote democrat just because among the two  ,   that is the one that I feel closer  ,   you know  ,   the most important for people
For the poor people  ,   for any colour  ,   no matter
hum
And so I vote that party just because that is their ideology  ,   but honestly  ,   it's been a long time since I
they don't represent that anymore
yes  ,   do you think there should be more parties  ?   But  ,   actually  ,   it's the same in most of the countries  ,   there is only two big parties and the rest  .    .   you can't choose
Not much more  ,   do you think there should be more  ?  
I think there should not be more than three
Why not  ?  
And  ,   on second thought  ,   here three is not convenient either  ,   because the third party  ,   the liberal  ,   what's the name of that party  ?   The liberal party usually all he does is just
supporting the pres  the candidate of their choice  ,   republican or democrat
yes
To try to waste the
mhm
the vote  .   But  ,   I think that  ,   no  ,   I don't think there should be many choices because then people get confused  ,   but  ,   afterwards
yes  ,   nobody could  ,   eh  ,   contr  to be able to governate  ,   really  ,   no
nobody  ,   right  .   Exactly  ,   because if you have more than two parties  ,   it means that the other parties have a different point of view to those two
And you already start with five or six or six  ,   you know  ,   different points of lives  ,   views  ,    well there's already a lot to choose from and many issues can be confused And
imagine there's going to be a lot of recount
The politic is an issue  .   Is an issue that I think is better  ,   the people already prefer not to think about it  ,   because for me for example sometimes I got upset sometimes when I think about it  .  
Is true  ,   but also part of the problem we have it for not voting  .  
You are a liar  ,   I'm not going to vote for you  .   And the next  ,   the future candidates already see that the mass cares  ,   they vote and they try to improve to  ,  
you know  ,   to get ahead  .  
yes  ,   yes
And those groups that vote up to now well You know haven't done anything as they don't want to know when their candidate has done something bad  .  
Ah  ,   well they've won the elections  ,   there were so many people that had voted anyway because they don't start to think really  ,   what is the best  ,   or not  .  
Exactly  .   Exactly  ,   and there are many people There are many people that now are starting to say  ,   ah  ,   perhaps he wasn't the best candidate and this and that  .  
And that's all  .   Exactly  .  
yes
They have a right to vote  ,   that would be something else  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   it can be but you  ,   you think  ?  
And up to a local level  ,   do you understand  ?  
hum
because  ,   where I live  ,   the city where I live in  ,   they wanted to pass a law to raise taxes  ,   the taxes
yes
and less than one percent of the city voted so they increased the taxes
sure
You know  ,   the ones that voted I'm sure own some businesses and the business people  ,   and they care about that because they are benefited in some way  .  
yes
and then the rest are their friends that live in this city  ,   they didn't know what was going to happen and now they are complaining about it  .  
exactly  ,   they are complaining right now and I'm like  ,   you didn't vote  .  
what do you think  ?   is there a big difference between republicans and democrats  ?  
I believe they have different faces but indeed they are the same  .  
mhm
they have ideologies that are different  ,   but in the end everyone votes and this makes them the same
yes  ,   the differences are very small  ,   these are just fundamental things
yes
they are the same
yes
I believe that too
but I believe that if
the bush administration is doing a government out of the ordinary  ,   he is doing things very dramatic
I think it has always been like that so
maybe the 70´s was not like that
yes
you know there was the civil rights movement and things like that
democrats were very different from republicans
mm
but that time is gone
yes
parhaps
Why do you think it has changed  ?  
segregation no longer exists between politicians  ,   well that´s what I believe
those were the only problems he had before  .  
if also the U  .  S  .   companies have changed a lot  ,   political parties have also changed
mm
for the party of the United States  .  
And one sees  ,   and you are born in that  ,   because if your family is such and such  ,   well you are already that and you can't change from that  ,  
hello  ,   hello
hello
eh I'm Nicole I'm from New York
eh no pardon I didn't hear you too well  ,   what's your name  ?  
ah Nicole
Nicole  ,   and where are you calling from  ?  
Nicole yes from New York
ah my name is Any  ,   I'm calling from Miami
ah hello  ,   how are you  ?  
yes
eh  ,   where are you from  ?  
from Miami
ah I mean but from what country
oh Puerto Rican and you  ?  
ah okay eh I was born here in New York but my family is Cuban
ah
eh well the topic is the police
I didn't understand much what it was saying the only thing that it was of politics
yes I mean I think that they said if the republicans and the democrats are really two distinct parties or if they are very similar and if there should be traditional parties
aha
I mean  ,   more than those two and and how many and how and I don't know don't know what what do you think of the politics here in this country
eh I don't know is so complicated
mm
eh I think that you know is not necessarily the best person for the job who wins but rather the person that has the most money because is the person that
mm
that can have you know more ads on TV  ,   on the radio
sure
in you know wherever
sure
but
sure and well also I think that the person that wins is the person that protects the interests of the ones that have money I mean the ones that have money move
yes
the politics in this country so is not only paying the ads but also eh the power in other words match the favor of the
of the ones that have money
mm  ,   I don't know I'm not too you know of politics or anything of that
mm
because it has its good thing and the bad  ,   each one
mm
but you know I've never gotten too much into that
mm
I vote when eh you know it's time to go vote but no and also when I go to vote I always try to educate myself
mm
to whom I think would be the best person for the job but
mm
I'm not one of these people that you know that read the newspaper  ,   watches the news or whatever to see what is happening with the politics  .  
mm
but I do think that we have to give the eh respect and honor to the office
mm
what I want to say with this is how the office of the president
mm
can be that I eh don't like what they are doing  .  
mm
but at the same time is the president and I don't see
mm
anything  ,   eh good that comes out of the people that criticize the president because that doesn't help
mm
the only thing that does is that it divides
mm
you know we are going to say the people
mm
and it is of no help  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   that won't help  ,   do you understand what I'm saying
yes yes
but  ,   you know  ,   it's like all those things that took place when the hurricane struck New Orleans  ,   I mean  ,   people started saying good or bad things of the President  ,   whatever
m
but they weren't helping the people of New Orleans
m
they were just criticizing the President but if they go and say that the President is doing something wrong  ,   well  ,   then they should tell him what to do  ,   do you understand what I'm saying  ?  
yes  ,   oh  ,   I'm sorry  ,   I don't  ,   I mean  ,   I think lots of people that were criticizing the President were also helping
mhm
I mean  ,   people from this country  ,   I mean  ,   they were donating money to people or they were giving them clothes and and and
mhm
a place to live  ,   and shared their homes and furniture I don't know  ,   they went there to help I mean  ,   to say that people were not
doing anything is false  ,   I mean  ,   some were criticizing too but I mean  ,   I think they were right in doing so  ,   I think
yes
they were right in complaining  ,   I mean  ,   they were complaining because not much was being done and I think it was necessary for them to complain and do something
yes  ,   that's what
I mean  ,   to complain about the President and don't do anything  ,   I mean  ,   I believe they were doing something  ,  
if you don't agree with that  ,   then you should complain and do something  ,   I mean  ,   if you complain and don't do anything is just wrong  ,   you must change things yourself
so I don't think they should sit and waiting for the next elections to take place in four years because in the next election  ,   something similar might happen and you really can't trust
that the politicians are going to do things honestly and legally  ,   so I'd say that people should complain and I think they should continue complaining and to do more things
I mean it's more difficult now to do more things  ,   it' harder if you are a normal person  ,   oh  ,   I mean  ,   you can't do the same job that
the President should be doing but you can try  ,   I mean  ,   you can try to do something from where you are  ,   but  ,   oh  ,   but I
don't know  ,   I mean  ,   I don't completely agree with what you just said about people not being able to criticize him because I believe that when
you see that something is wrong  ,   you should say it
I'm not saying that they shouldn't criticize but I believe the can do it but I don't like it when people start oh
complaining and speaking bad things about others without proposing a solution
sure
if they want to say something  ,   you know  ,   it's not a good idea to do this or whatever  ,   then they should give a solution
sure
because if they don't then only thing that happens is that other people start  ,   oh  ,   you know
to be on the defensive
and this happens  ,   I believe that when someone criticize another person without proposing a solution  ,   they confuse the situation
sure
they don't help and that's what I didn't like  ,   I saw a lot of people saying this is wrong but you know
mhm
they did it but at the same time  ,   they didn't propose a solution
sure
the only thing they did was complain
but what could they do  ,   I mean  ,   the problem is that they are not part of the government so it's harder for them to do something  ,   I mean
mhm
I didn't like too much how Bush eh responded to the situation in in New Orleans I mean I think that he really was like a lack of of
mm
it was like having a country without a president in that situation I mean effectively he like didn't do anything but since I don't know what I could do except give money
I mean I could contribute money to the effort of helping the people there or could
mm
go go over there ah ah ah work there I mean to work in the effort or donate some of my things I mean like throwing some things of mine
but no I can't do the work that he should be doing
mm  ,  
I'm not the president  ,   him I don't know is like I don't know  ,   I don't know is hard  ,   is hard being a politician because one has to make a lot of decisions and
always the people are looking at you like to criticize I mean the people are never satisfied with what the president is doing any president I mean the people are always full of complaints
but  ,   but I don't know sometimes I think that that also in a certain way like it keeps keeps like alive an environment of thinking
mm
that if the people stop criticizing in other words stop complaining and criticizing like the  people stop questioning a lot
and in absence that can be very dangerous also
yes yes
in a situation where the people continue without questioning like there could be very bad things
mm
so now a lot of complaining and little action doesn't do much
yes
is better to complain and do and act but I don't know
well is also better than in other countries
mm sure
because at least one can  ,   one has the option of being able to complain and can say whatever one wants
sure
not in other countries
so far but probably they will take that away from us also very soon but
I don't think so  ,   because of the constitution that we have I don't think that will happen
I don't know  ,   I don't know well the I mean that movement of ah what is it called I forgot the name of this movement that they can
they can see eh all the things that one does ah I forgot what is called  ,   well but there's been a lot from September eleven there's been a lot of movement of taking away
the rights of the people I mean especially if one is an immigrant here be careful like one says because you are seeing right that you are seeing in the house a person like that
anyone but if they have any suspicion if one sees a Muslim or I don't know I mean eh  ,   I think it could be dangerous to say what one thinks
and in this country in the past it was very dangerous to say what one was thinking in the fifties I mean the people absolutely had no right to say what they thought
because if one if they suspected that one had communist thoughts they could take you out of your house I mean I think that yes the constitution well I well I defend the constitution a lot
but I think that it is very I mean in practice that constitution is not followed as much
Hi
Hello  .   To whom do I have the pleasure of speaking  ?  
Hi  ,   I'm Laia  ,   from Philadelphia
Ah  ,   I'm in Philadelphia too  .   My name is Silvia  .  
Ah  ,   that's good  ,   I thi   ,   maybe we spoke the other day  ?  
Ah  ,   eh  ,   about
About Spain  ,   and  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   ok  ,   your voice sounded familiar  .   Very well  ,   how are you  ?  
Spain  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   exactly  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   Very goo  ,  d eh  ,   eh  ,   your name is Laia  ?  
Laia  ,   yes  ,   L  ,   A  ,   I  ,   A
what
It's a Catalan name
Ah  ,   it's  ,   I  ,   uhm  ,   I was going to ask  ,   because  ,   it's very pretty and I have never heard it before
yes  ,   thank you  .   It's a pretty common name in Catalonia  ,   but outside of Catalonia  ,   it's not  .   Of course not  .  
Ah  ,   and  ,   and  ,   does it mean something  ,   or
well  ,   not to my knowledge  ,   some people use it as  ,   as a short form of Eulalia  ,   which is Barcelona's patron saint
Ah
Ah  ,   but in my case  ,   I've always been named Laia  ,   with the short form  ,   so to speak
Ah  ,   then you originally come from
There are people named Eulalia who use Laia as a short form  ,   you know
Like  ,   uhm  ,   like a nickname
yes  ,   exactly  ,   but in my  DNI it doesn't put Eulalia  ,   it puts Laia directly
Um  ,   um  ,   how interesting  ,   for me  ,   everything related  ,   to  ,   the languages catches my attention
Um  ,   um  ,   yes  ,   yes
But you are from Catalonia  ,   yes  ,   you told me that you were from Barcelona  ,   yes
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   I'm from Barcelona  ,   yes
yes  ,   talk to me of  ,   of the difference of the people let's say from Barcelona  ,   to the people from Madrid
Well  ,   all complicated  ,   let's see  ,   um There's a lot of difference I think at a level  ,   well  .   at a linguistic level  ,   or at a political level
Um  ,   um
and of being  ,   very thrifty  ,   that gives them a certain bad reputation sometimes   ,   in the rest of Spain
yes  ,   uh  ,   uh  ,   Um  .  
and and well  ,   there has been some controversy because this new constitution  ,   lets say  ,   defines Catalonia as a nation which is part of Spain  ,   no  ,   a nation within a State  ,  
yes what does that mean  ?  
well  ,   it means that in certain areas  ,   like in education  ,   or certain economical competencies  ,   I mean  ,   there will be more autonomy  ,   lets say  ,   Catalonia has a
she has a special place within Spain
Oh oh
it will be more autonomous than other regions  ,   lets say  ,   well  ,   in Spain  ,   they call it history regions  .  
Oh  .  
yes  ,   Galicia  ,   too  ,   well  ,   they have  ,   they have their own language  ,   what happens is that Galicia  ,   is much more  ,   lets say the difference have diluted
And the language of Galicia is the Gallego  ,   it's similar to Portuguese  ,   it's original from the people of  ,   um  ,   um
Gallego  ,   yes yes  ,   Gallego and Portuguese  ,   they are quite similar  ,   it's really difficult to distinguish which one is which
yes yes yes  ,   like no
it's a dialect  ,   no  ,   you could almost say that they are dialects of the same language  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
yes  ,   um  ,   um  ,   um  ,   um  ,   um
While  ,   well the Basque is completely different lets say it has nothing to do with it and Catalan is a romance language
yes  ,   totally  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   um  ,   um
but  ,   that  ,   more different from the Castilian  ,    which is also becoming Castilian a little  ,   for all  ,   for all the constant contact that there is
um  .   yes  .  
And  ,   and  ,   what types of freedoms  ,   eh  ,   of  ,   of regional autonomy  ,   does Catalonia have that Andalusia doesn't have for example  ?  
Um  ,   for example  .   Catalonia has its own politics  ,   the national politic is different in Catalonia than in the rest of Spain
And  ,   and  ,   and the rest of Spain shares a national policy  ?  
Exactly  ,   the  ,   our country has its own police  ,   Catalonia has its own police  ,   and the rest of Spain has a common one  ,   so to speak
Um  ,   um  .   Ah  ,   um  ,   um  .  
And how much is taught in Catalan and how much in Spanish  ?  
Um  ,   well for example  ,   I  ,   in my case  ,   I studied everything in Catalan  ,   except the subject of Spanish but all the subjects I did them in Catalan  ,   and that  ,   that is the norm  ,   what happens is that some schools  ,   that well  ,   teach the Spanish  .  
But the norm is that all is in Catalan  ,   except the subject of Spanish  ,   what happens is that Catalonia is a very bilingual society  ,   then you hear the Catalan and Spanish
indistinctly in all parts  ,   you hear it in the street  ,   yes  ,   Catalan  ,   Spanish  ,   the television has both  ,   I don't know  ,   there's  ,   there's a lot of blend  .  
Do they also maintain the language  ?  
Um  ,   not so much  ,   not so much  .  
Um  ,   um  .  
everyone who's more or less from a Catalonian family or even  ,   no  ,   it's really easy to absorb the language and to learn
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   um  ,   um  .  
In exchange the  ,   the Basque country not so much  ,   even the Basque president I think doesn't know how to speak Basque  ,   and  ,   and it's a president of a national party  ,   um  ,   nationalist  ,   like  ,   pro Basque
Ah  .    Um  .  
And is there someone  ,   there isn't  ,   but  ,   are there pockets of people who speak it as a first language  ?  
the situation is a little  ,   well  ,   less measured  ,   but  ,   yes they speak it and there are schools entirely in Basque I think  ,   but few
And there's a movement  ,   eh  ,   to get bring the Basque back more  ,   I imagine that this would be part
yes  ,   um  ,   I don't know  ,   the Basque country has a government  ,   well  ,   a nationalist  ,   pro Basque  ,   but I think  ,   like in Cataluna  ,   um  ,   I don't know  ,   the language is something really important to us
and we give it a lot of weight  ,   I think that in the Basque country this isn't as important  ,   I think that
Ah  ,   how strange  .  
All day we're like this  .    And  ,   and I think well  ,   neither  ,   but I think that in the Basque country they don't talk about it as much
of this topic  .  
yes  ,   what happens is I think is that they have it as  ,   have  ,   I think they have the Catalan as very assumed  ,   already like something of theirs also
yes  ,   um  .  
And  ,   well  ,   that's the impression that I get  ,   I could be wrong  .  
yes  ,   And  ,   and  ,   the Basque government now what relation does it have with the ETA as  ,   as far as its political methods  .  
Ah  ,   let's see  ,   the  ,   um  ,   the party in charge in the Basque Country is  ,   um  ,   ah  ,   national party  ,   is called the Basque Nationalist Party is  ,   let's say  ,   of middle  ,   middle right perhaps  ,   middle
but  ,   I mean  ,   they don't  ,   don't give  ,   don't give support to the violence at all  ,   they  ,   well are against the violence  ,   are against the  ETA
ah  ,   what happens is that  ,   um  ,   that yes that  ,   yes that they have an orientation  ,   well  ,   um  ,   nationalist plus liberties  ,   and then already  ,   in the Basque Country there's another party
that it is like the  ,   the branch  ,   the political branch of the  ETA so to speak  ,   that they are  ,   well  ,   they don't condemn the attacks  ,   they have a  ,   have a much more ambiguous attitude  ,   towards the violence
Um  ,   um
And these people were  ,   in fact  ,   under um  ,   the  ,   under the Aznar government  ,   the president that there was before in Spain  ,   they banned that party  ,   we banned it  .  
And  ,   um  ,   but this people well  ,    well continue  ,   they have changed names  ,   and I don't know what  ,   I mean  ,   they continue being there  .   And  ,   and now with the change of the government  ,   I mean the  ,   the old one
the president that there was before  ,   with the party that there was before  ,   they didn't talk with the president of the party  ,   of the Basque Country  ,   they didn't talk to each other  ,   then  ,   let's say that it was hard to advance in some solution because they didn't talk to each other
And  ,   and  ,   and they didn't talk with the president  ?  
Aznar  ,   didn't talk with the president of the Basque Country  ,   they didn't talk to each other  ,   yes they were like  ,   I don't know  ,   three years without meeting  ,   outrageous
Um  ,   um  .   Um  .   Um  .  
And now  ,   with th new government  ,   at least they do dialogue  ,   they do meet  ,   I mean  ,   mm  ,   there are still differences  ,   right  ?   but
Um  ,   um  ,   and in Spain  ,   how do they see ETA  ?  
Well  ,   in Spain it is seen as something terrible  ,   I don't know  ,   like something ca   ,   that  ,   whe   ,   ETA first appeared during Franco's dictatorship  ,   so
yes  ,   yes
maybe at that moment it made sense  ,   because well  ,   there was a dictatorship and  ,   I don't know  ,   they had been through some really tough situations and  ,   I don't know  ,   maybe in that historical moment
it had a reason to be  ,   but now  ,   most of the people  ,   mm  ,   think that in a democratic society it has no room  ,   when there can be democratic parties who defend all those ideas  ,   right  ?    ,   in Catalonia there are parties who  ,   independentist parties
but who just don't use violence
Um  ,   um  ,   um  ,   um
Um  ,   the problem is  ,   the right thing is that  ,   that in the Basque country ETA does have some social support  ,   because otherwise
otherwise it would not have survived  ,   right  ?   I mean  ,   this people  ,   ETA  ,   I don't know
Right  ,   yes
Hello  ,   good evening  .  
Good evening  .   How are you today  ?  
Fine  ,   and you  ?  
Ah  ,   fine  ,   thanks  .   What's your name  ?  
Ah  ,   my name is I'm Norma from here Atlanta  ,   Georgia  ,   and where are you from  ?  
On  ,   in New York  ,   my name is Anastina  .  
Ah  ,   okay  .  
Okay Okay  ,   Do you have  ,   girls or boys  ?  
yes  ,   I have boys  ,   I have two boys one is seven and the other
Oh  .  
three
Oh  ,   you are very young  ,   right  ?   young  .  
Mm  ,   not exactly  ,   I'm forty one years old
Oh  ,   boy and me  ,   I'm forty eight years old
Ah  ,   you see  ,   we are there more or less
Yeah Right  ?   And I have a daughter  ,   she's twenty eight years old  .  
Aha  .  
yes  .  
Yeah  .   Yes  ,   we touched today  .  
And what about you  ?    What do you think about politics  ?  
Yeah  ,   sorry  ,   I don't know a lot about politics  ,   so eh  ,   no  ,   you talk to me about it  .  
Well  ,   I really  ,   particularly  ,   don't like politics much  .  
Really  ?  
no  ,   there are always these fights between democrats and the  ,   eh  ,   with republicans who say one thing and another thing and you really  ,   many times  ,   don't know who's right
Ah  .    Yeah  .  
because there are always discussions about different topics  ,   no  ?    that
that well  ,   have different ideas  ,   no  ?  
Yeah  .  
but no  ,   and you  ,   yes  ,   I'm really not into politics and neither no
Really  ?    And me too  .  
no  ,   no I only say that I listen to the news  .    No  ?    That  ,   eh  ,   here I see the news on television  ,   and there's always  ,   no  ?    always
Yeah  .    Yeah  .  
they always discuss different  ,   eh  ,   different aspects  ,   no  ?    That bring
Right  .  
Try to put  ,   no  ?    things on the eh  things so the laws to they govern the country  ,   but many
Hmm  .  
hmm  .  
Right  .   And  ,   and  ,   um  ,   what do you  ,   what do you ah are  ?  
Which political party  ?  
Ah  .  
Hmm  .  
Do you too  ?   Hmm  .   Hmm  .  
Ah  .   Of course  ,   of course  ,   yes  ,   there are many people that many politicians that really get advantage of their influence  ,   right  ?   of their power and there is so much hmm
Aha  .   Right  ?  
No  ,   that could  ,   could be seen any moment  ,   right  ?   for the in each country  ,   right  ?   always things happen
Yeah  .  
strange things with the politicians
Yeah  .  
but well  ,   it is like that  ,   right  ?   when people rise to a powerful position  ,   always there is  ,   the temptation to abuse of their power
Ah  ,  
right  ?   that it starts to drive to manipulate other people
Yeah
Aha
Right  ?   Ah  ,   that's not good  ,   hum
Mm
And oh  ,   what  ,   who is ah mm mayor  ,   the mayor  ?  
Here  ?  
Yeah  .  
Eh What's the name  ?   That's a lady who is eh  ,   is a lady 
Oh  ,   a lady  .  
yes  ,   is a  ,   is a woman
Oh  ,  
I don't remember  ,   the mayor here from Atlanta  .  
Oh  .  
The governor is Sonny Perdue who's a republican but that the majority of the people are
Aha  .  
don't agree with that  ,   right  ?   that's he's taken many wrong steps here in Georgia
Really  ?  
right  ?   with the laws and really no eh  ,   there aren't people that  ,   well  ,   that voted for the repu   ,   because there are ma   ,   after many years  ,   right  ?   a
a Republican  .  
Mm  .  
he took  ,   he was a governor
Mm  ,   mm
of Georgia because for many years the democrats had been
Oh  .  
but so  ,   I mean  ,   it seems to me that people are kind of bumped with him now  ,   no  ?   He hasn't really done a lot of good things for the State  ,   no  ?  
Mm
It hasn't benefited the State that much  ,   above all the people  ,   the teachers and the
Mhm  .  
State workers are not very happy with him so I don't think he will be reelected  ,   I hope he's not  .  
Yeah
I don't like him neither  .  
Do you know the name of his wife  ?  
She is'  ,   oh  ,   I can't remember you know  ,  
and
No  ,   but she is good  ,   well oh she is among the best women in the whole country  ,   no  ,   one of the best
but I can't remember her name
Oh  ,   no
Franklin  ,   yes  ,   her last name is Frankin
Franklin  ?   Oh  ,   we here have Bloomberg  .  
Aha  .  
And I don't  ,   oh  ,   I don't know oh  ,   oh  ,   no  ,   oh  ,   I don't know much  .   Lots of corruption  ,   you know  ?   So  ,   that's why I don't like it
Mhm  .  
Sure  ,   yes  .  
And yes  ,   I believe that lots of people are not interested in politics  ,   I hear about it in television  .  
Yeah  .   Right  ?  
news  ,   no  ?   that's what happens with politicians  .  
Yeah  ,   yeah  ,   right  ?   and Clinton  ,   do you like Clinton  ?  
No  ?   and Well  ,   it's not about me liking her
Oh  .  
but my husband works here and when I  ,   when I came here I was single so I married him and he works here and our children were born here and are being raised here  ,   so well
Yeah  ,   yeah
Right now  ,   no  ,   he's here  ,   he has a steady job  ,   so
Mm  ,   and
we are here for now
yes  ,   and
but I'm open to any change  ,   so
Aha  .  
if I can go to another place  ,   I do it
And Bush  ,   do you like him  ?  
Huh  ?  
Bush  .  
Bois  ?  
Bush  ,   the  ,   pre  President Bush  .    You don't know him  ?    Eh  ,   Bush  ,   hmmm  ,   George Bush  .  
Ah  ,   Bush  .    Oh  ,   George Bush  ,   no  ,   no I don't like him
President Bush  .  
he's had some hits
Yeah  .    True  .  
No  ?    But  ,   like  ,   in the majority of cases  ,   above all in this Iraq war  ,   I think that many people are against his decisions  ,   no  ?  
No  ,   he's really  ,   eh  ,   only spending the taxes of the American  ,   no  ?    In  ,   in like  ,   all this  ,   this money  ,   no  ?  
There's many people who are suffering here in America and all this money that's going to this war in Iraq  ,   it's completely ridiculous  .  
Yeah  ,   yeah
No it's really  ,   it's really  ,   it's ridiculous and besides there are so many people who have died  ,   for the pure
okay
yes  ,   so
he is very young
yes  ,   I do not agree with him  ,   right  ?  
yeah
I think he only works on his own  ,   not to help others
what about me  ?  
yes  ,   the last one was here the hurican Katrina
Oh  ,   really  ?  
it destroyed New Orleans
okay
it was a disaster right  ?   because
oh  ,   yes
No  ,   they did not respond ontime  .  
oh  ,   no
the people have suffered a lot everywhere  .  
that´s truth
here on Georgia we have a lot
that´s bad
Many people lost their homes
Ah  ,   yes  .   Ah  ,   yes  ,   how bad  .  
No I think that in Texas and in many places
Ah  .  
also  ,   right  ?   people that have gone from New Orleans
Yeah  .  
because really is  ,   is a disaster there  .  
avoided many  ,   many problems  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   many problems  .  
But up to now is  ,   up to now  ,   that's already a big screw up that it has given him  ,   right  ?   like it says
Yeah  .   And you know that now eh  ,   uh  ,   another problem also
Sure  ,   another problem  ,   although with that already  ,   they already had the election the first  ,   I think  ,   and they gave no at least they acted more quickly
Yeah  ,   Ah  ,   no  ,   right  ?   yes  ,   is very fast
Mm  .  
but  ,   you know is a big problem in ah
Well  ,   really  ,   yes  ,   is a
New  ,   New Orleans and ah
Mm  .  
ah  ,   ah  ,   Louisiana  ,   right  ?  
yes  .  
Louisiana  ,   Mississippi
Ah  .   Mm  ,  
everything is  ,   yes  ,   is a disaster  ,   right  ?  
yes  .  
Really the majority  ,   I think that  ,   I mean  ,   the people the people that live here that I mean  ,   the majority of the people are not rich  ,   right  ?  
Right  .  
The majority of the people are middle class and lower
Aha
then I think that it's affecting the people more  ,   right  ?   of middle class and lower we are suffering more  ,   right  ?  
Yeah  .  
that the  ,   other people  ,   because the people that have money don't even feel it  ,   goes up  ,   goes down and there's not much
Aha  .   And do you have a car  ?  
yes  ,   I have a car  .  
Oh  ,   I don't have a car  ,   I don't
Ah  ,   you don't have a car
I don't have
yes  ,   I have a car  ,   that's why I know  ,   because now for instance  ,   gas has increased
How much is the gas  ?  
Here it is  ,   eh  ,   right it must have raised already to three dollars and some
Oh  ,   my goodness  ,   regular  ?   regular gasoline  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   because right now went my husband to buy gas
Oh  ,   no
then  ,   a lot  ,   a lot of gas stations had no gas because they always save it  ,   right  ?   they wait for it to raise
Yeah
for the price to raise to start selling it
Mhm
and some  ,   some were selling it  ,   but at two ninety nine already  ,   so tomorrow it may be at
Oh  ,   goodness  ,   mm
three and some
Oh my goodness
Mm
That's not good  ,   what kind of car have you got  ?  
Oh  ,   I have a Volvo Sedan
Oh
Mhm
Oh  ,   the new one
No  ,   it's not new  ,   it's from ninety six  ,   but it's good  ,   it's fast  ,   it's not
Oh  ,   yeah
Uh huh
I want a car  ,   but it's very expensive  ,   you know  ,   i don't have the money  ,   oh  ,   you know  ,   that's not good for me  ,   uh  ,   the gas
Right
The gas is really expensive
Yeah  ,   gas is very expensive  ,   it's too expensive
Uh huh
No  ,   and my husband is so used to the car now and i tell him "you can go on the bus anyday"
¿right  ?    ,   to a certain point to get to work  ,   then you take the train from there
Oh
and  ,   he says "no  ,   i don't have the patience to wait for the train or the bus here"
Oh
"in Atlanta  ,   because they take  ,   i mean  ,   they take too long to come"
Oh  ,   you live in Atlanta ¿right  ?  
Yes  ,   in Atlanta
Oh  ,   ¿is it cold [there]  ?  
No  ,   it seems right now we're  .    .    .   it's changing a little  ,   it has rained a little bit and it's kinda colder but
Yeah  ,   yeah
we are about seventy six  ,   so
Hi
Hi  ,   ¿how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   ¿and you  ?  
¿Huh  ?  
Uh  ,   my name is Zulma  ,   uh  ,   I'm in Texas
You're in Texas
Uh huh
Well  ,   uh  ,   this is Vicente  ,   and I'm in New York
In New York  ,   OK
Yes  ,   i was  ,   i was listening to what we have to talk about
yes
I believe it said we have to talk about politics
Yes  ,   it was a bit difficult to understand everything it was saying  ,   but uh  ,   i think we have to talk about politics and whether
it's right or wrong that there are only two parties
And  ,   and more or less the difference between both parties  ,   ¿right  ?  
yes  ,   yes
Something like that and then it went on about too many things they're looking for
yes  ,   yes
It's enough about the difference  ,   but then it started talking about a party  .    .    .   something  ,   i didn't get what was ultimately in question  ,   ¿you know  ?  
Yeah  ,   i didn't understand much of what it said
yes because I  ,   and one  ,   one and he had this gringo accent
yes  .  
but the thing is that he says that the difference between the two parties  ,   that's my understanding  ?   Do you understand  ?   One is more liberal and the other is conservative  .  
Mhm  .   Sure  .  
But oh  ,   the other  ,   he then continued with something else that I didn't understand  .   I couldn't understand it from there  ,   do you  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
but I thought it had to do with politics  ,   democrats and republicans  ,   oh  .  
Aha  .  
That democrats are more liberal and the republicans are conservative  .  
Mhm  .  
and that many of the situations are both because you can't be  ,   you can't be too liberal right  ?  
Mhm  .  
Liberal is good  ,   but it does have some bad things too  .  
yes  ,  yes  .  
And the conservatives  ,   if they are too conservative then they don't help people and there can be trouble with that  ,   do you understand  ?  
yes but I think the politics in the United States  ,   traditionally  ,   there has always been two main parties  ,   it's divided in two parties  .  
even if someone is running for a political position and has different ideas  ,   they can run because the parties have
so much power that if you are not a democratic or republican candidate you basically won't have a chance to win  ,   to win that position  .   I think this has limited the political life in the United States  ,   it has prevented it from being diverse  .  
don't have enough votes to get to any position  .   Do you understand what I'm saying  ?  
There's there's there's a social party  ,   there's a party of the working people  .   All that exist  ,   I'm telling you the truth that it exist  ?   But
No  ,   I I know they exist  ,   but eh  ,   but basically they are non existent because they haven't be able
to people because if the people don't
haven't been able Mm  ,   yes yes yes  .   yes yes yes  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   mm   .  
He had a lot of money  ,   a lot  .   Money means money  ,   understand  ?  
So he himself could pay  .   He didn't need any other person  .   But he got got really on top there  ,   close to the to the republicans and the democrats three parties had
close to three parties to vote understand  ?  
But still the republican won  ,   understand  ?   But I'm telling you like that that yes eh parties exist  .   This is the United States  ,   you can't for what if no other party exists  .  
Still they all need the vote of a certain amount of people eh  .   To represent  ,   understand  ?   To be represented  .  
The thing is now  ,   to win is another thing  .  
Understand  ?   To win you have to do something else so if you
yes
You you think that you have to be like right  ?   that had money for him to pay his own propaganda understand  ?  
yes  .  
Eh  ,   you have that type of money another party perhaps you arrive and perhaps one of these days there could be a representative from the independent  ,   or the family  ,   or of the workers' party  .  
Mm  ,   mm
But the thing is that the republicans right  ?   and the democrats are so big that it's impossible to get to any other part You need to have a very big idea  ,   understand  ?  
Sure  ,   that's what I'm saying that for that for ah for historic and traditional reasons the United States has maintained only two parties that are majority  .  
yes  .  
And in the historical trajectory they haven't given the opportunity to any other party of
No  ,   no  ,   no  .   They give it but it doesn't make it  .   It doesn't make it  ,   but it exist  .   This in the United  
this is one of the most liberal countries in the world  ,   see  ?  
Ah  .  
You want to start a a party a party if you want to start a political party today see  ?   you can start it today  .  
yes  ,   Sure  ,   yes yes  ,   I understand that  .   No  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   oh sure sure  .   I'm not I'm not saying that the laws prevent you that no that no
Oh  ,   exactly
the law allows that to happen  ,   I'm just saying that the people in the United States
Exactly  ,   the people
They haven't given another party the chance to reach power as the democratic and republican parties have
Aha  .  
Right  ,   the vote system has been the same ever since the country was founded  .  
it has not changed  .   Mhm  .  
look  ,   it hasn't changed because it's the most perfect one in the world  ,   but are they saying the truth  ?   Are they  ?   Is it the most perfect one or they are not changing it  ,   look  ,   I can tell you right now
Mhm  .  
that if you want  ,   right  ?   I can get to  ,   name a person  ,   name a person  ,   Micky Mouse  ,   he's not alive  ,   he might be alive  ,   he can become President of the United States  .  
and and  .   no  ,   no  ,   in the United States  ,   money is more important
Do you understand what I'm trying to say  ?   When you are a leader  ,   leadership is very important  ,   do you understand  ?  
No  ,   leadership  ,   sure  ,   leadership is important  .   The thing is that the State's leadership  ,   I mean  ,   in the United States is established in part of the
Do you know what leadership is  ?   Leadership
if people like you or not  .   That's why  ,   that's why a lot of
Not exactly  ,   and that is the most important
Hollywood artist have managed to become president or governor
No  ,   not exactly  ,   because the inspiration of a le  of a leadership is more important than a book  .   You can't learn that in a book  .   I can't  ,   I can't learn how to be a leader  .   That is not possible  ,   understand  ?  
The  ,  eh  ,   the boss of  ,   there ain't no book you can read
yes
to learn that because I may be the most ignorant person in the world
Mhm
but have the inspiration for people to see me as a good thing  ,   then I can manage to be the President  ,   understand  ?  
I agree with you  ,   one hundred per cent  .   Leadership is
That  ,   that is the most important thing  .   When you get to a certain level
No  ,   no  ,   no  ,   I agree  .   Leadership is a feature that
exactly
But if you are going to be a political leader  ,   mm  ,   there are other things that are as important as being a good leader
You must know of economy  ,   you must know of laws  ,   you have to  ,   and all that you have to study
no no no no no no  ,   I'm absolutely in agreement with you because you know why  .   When I'm leadership  ,   right  ?   I can have consultations that tell me what I can do  ,   and what I can say to people  .  
I give you counsel  ,   I can have good counsel  .   Look
Mm  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
You understand me  ?   If you are not of European descent  ,   you can't become one  ,   even though the population
Mm  ,   mm hmm  ,   mm  .  
is Indian or mixed race  ,   are in the majority  ,   you see  ?   You can't get there in any other place  .  
Hm  .   I don't believe that  .   I'm not in agreement  .   I believe that there are European countries that have much better  .  
There is a man  ,   there is a man  ,   there is a man the rest of the world sees right now  .   The majority of the world  ,   right  ?   They notice the United States  ,   especially in European countries  .  
Now you have another person  .  
Aha  .  
I'm tell you that there are many laws that because it's more advanced that the rest of the world  ,   you see  ?    And people of the world  ,   the rest of the world doesn't know  .    Is there a  ,   where are you from  ?  
The rest of the world doesn't know this  .    There are European countries that much before the United States gave the right to vote to women  .  
Okay  ?    No  ,   the politics of many European countries are much more advanced than the United States  .  
Let me tell you the United States but much more advanced than any other country because  ,   you know why  ?  
Because intellectually  ,   the United States is one thousand years more advanced than
No  .  
I can't compare their politics with the United States  .    I can't compare it  ,   you know  ?  
Hmm  ,   yes  .  
In the  ,   in the United States the system is more important than the president  .    You know  ?    Remember I could Mickey Mouse president
of the United States  .    And it can be effective because the United States system is the most effective in the world  .  
No  ,   I agree with you that many countries in the world look to the United States and are jealous with the system in the United States
Well of course  ,   no  ?    because
but because it is a system that is individualist and capitalist  .   And here  ,   who wants
Eh  ,   the presidential system  ,   yes
and wants to exploit the others and stand on everybody  ,   I have the chance to do it and become rich
No  ,   eh  ,   eh  ,   the
And that  ,   everybody  ,   everybody is jealous of that  .   If you come here and want to make money  ,   you can make money and you can exploit other people  ,   and you can stand on other people  ,   you can do it
No  ,   some people do it right  ,   it's alright
There is a country in the world  ,   there is a country in the world who gives money to the rest of the world  ,   if I have to tell you what country is that then
you are in not in earth  .   There is a country that gives money to the rest of the world  ,   do you know which is that country  ?  
Thre are a lot  ,   there are a lot of count 
That is the United States
Good evening I'm Joe hello
Hello  ,   I'm Patrick
Oh Patrick from New Mexico  .  
well yes
yes we've talked like three times we've talked  ,   that's good I really like to talk a lot with you  ,   how nice  .  
How is everything fine  ?  
yes everything is fine  .  
And the weather is changing over there  ?  
What  ?  
The climate  ,   is changing in New Mexico or is it still hot there
Ah no  ,   no yes  ,   well  ,   the last  ,   three days it changed  .   There was a lot of rain and and ah  ,   well the temperature went down a little no  .  
yes And what do you think of politics Patrick  ?  
Well  ,   is  ,   is a Is something very ah  ,   Is very  ,   is very hard to talk about the  ,   the politics  ,   because  ,   I mean there are many things that  .  
that one has to  ,   that one has to think of no  ,   ah um But that  ,   I I think that the  ,   the situation of  ,   of our country  .  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   I think that between the republican party and between the democrat you see something good in reality  ,   but I think that now the is worse with the situation
presently  .   Because things have worsened a lot with the republican party  ,   right  ?   with that of the war and the price increase and  ,   the way in which  ,  
the issues are handled  ,   like this of the storms that passed  .   And the corruption that is now appearing  ,   now from the republican senators in the congress  .  
yes  ,   I think there's been corruption  ,   for example with what happened  ,   in no  ,   that so much happened but the other  ,   that President Bush won this  ,  
depending on the Florida votes  ,   and I don't know like that  ,   in reality for a few votes  ,   well the vote of the whole nation was decided  .  
Sure  .  
yes instead of doing it by  ,   what is it called  ,   by delegates  ,   districts  ,   by however  .   I know that they should all count like that  ,   that the majority wins  ,   in reality that the majority wins and not that it wins  ,  
yes
Because that doesn't count  ,   it shouldn't count like that  .   No I was very disillusioned  ,   with how the politic is and  ,   And where they go walking  ,   and
yes  ,   yes um
And do you believe in the existence of other parties  ,   do you think they should make more parties or  ?  
um I think so  ,   there should be more parties because  ,   well
yes
They have three strong parties
yes
And also they have an  ,   institution that  ,   is like  ,   like  ,   goes checking  ,   all the parties  ,   that we don't have a  ,   a  ,   national  institution that is like
it is part of the parties to review all
yes
to check for cheating or not
as the two parties are very powerful Republican and Democrat
yes
the influence is very large in the American people but sometimes is not enough for both parties
sometimes they take advantage
yes
Now there is much more division then before  ,   people disagree with many things
the nation is divided for example Louisiana is a poor area
you can not compare Houston and mississippi  .   because the president is from there
for example in Texas things got better super fast  ,   not as many people who died in Louisiana
truth who died in Louisiana and Mississippi
yes  ,   yes  .  
they are powerful parties and control everything
yes
not only matches  ,   but there are also government agencies that must operate
yes  ,  yes
for example FEMA took too long to take action when Hurricane Katrina was catastrophic
they took a long time to close something
yes
they reacted very  ,   very slow  .  
yes it is sad  .  
And which parties dominate New Mexico  ?  
Well it is  ,   one of the  ,   of the  ,   of the States of battle  ,   right  .   of the
Oh  ,   yes
so  ,   yes but in general I think that it is more than  ,   the democrat  .  
I don´t know when they begun to do this  ,   and I don´t know how much  ,   helps  ,   for example  ,   in Colorado so  ,   I think they were going to have more  .   Power in the votes  .  
the last time  ,   didn´t  ,   didn´t work Because they did not have it was not so organized and the did not have  ,   the districts they wanted to have and give more power to Colorado  .  
Compare to other places like Ohio  ,   new York  ,   Texas  .  
yes
That have much  ,   that have more power in the vote and I don´t know those things well of course  ,   they affect  .   The question  ,   is like I was thinking about here in Colorado  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes it must be  .   for each district  .  
Imagine that every district has a vote for the electoral college  ,   ¿right  ?  
And they must  ,   uh  ,   be spread  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   instead of being  ,   uh  ,   most of them win  ,   they all win  ,   like yeah
They definitely need to improve the system
But yes
Regarding that
uh  ,   well  ,   last semester
Right
i studied uh  ,   politics  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   and there are two states who did change their laws  ,   ¿right  ?  
yes
Nebraska and Maine are like that
Yes
But i think that they always  ,   they always go to  ,   uh  ,   Main  ,   always  ,   because it's always Democrat  ,   and Nebraska always goes Repubilcan
I think  ,   but yeah  ,   they do have  ,   they do have laws that votes can be distributed  ,   ¿right  ?  
That the majority of votes count  ,   that's what they say
yes
oh
i mean  ,   that they can spread their districts like that  ,   if  ,   if Bush wins in a district
oh
wins a vote  ,   but if for example Kerry wins  ,   another  ,   but of  ,   of the same state  .   he can win that electoral vote  .  
oh
I mean is  ,   is more fair like that  .  
Sure  .  
yes
Like that  ,   is not fair  .  
Exactly  .   And I also think with nominations for big positions  ,   like for example supreme court chief  ,   well that only is picked by the president
I think that there should be another way of deciding that because  .   the president is always going to pick someone who leans towards his party  .   And someone who supports his political system  .  
You understand me  ?   But that doesn't necessarily  ,   mean that it's for the well being of the nation is that all the influence  .  
Um  ,   oh  ,   ¿do you speak Spanish  ?  
And you  ?  
Uh  ,   I'm Pilar
¿Where from  ,   Pilar  ?  
From New York too
¿Yeah  ?    ,   wow  ,   I'm in Queens  ,   ¿where are you  ?  
In Manhattan
Oh  ,   wow  ,   that's good
Um
Uh  ,   you can't understand very well what these people are saying  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   i know
No  ,   the truth is i don't  ,   but well  ,   i understood the subject was politics
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   and  ,   ¿where are you from  ?  
Spain
Oh  ,   spanyard  ,   wow  ,   that's good  .   All my grand parents are from Spain  ,   from the south
¿Yeah  ?  
Yes  ,   my  ,   my grandmother was from the Canary Islands
Um  ,   uh huh
So  ,   i  ,   i  ,   i have gone to Spain many times  ,   i love Madrid  ,   Barcelona  ,   Marbella
¿Yes  ?  
Ibiza  ,   yeah  ,   ¿how long have you been here Pilar  ?  
One year
Oh  ,   ¿yeah  ?    ,   ¿just one year  ?    ,   and how different do you find it
Oh  ,   the truth is it's completely different
Yeah  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   but you  ,   ¿you lived in Madrid  ?  
Yeah
But well  ,   well  ,   the only thing is that the night starts later than here
The night and everything  ,   lunch  ,   dinner
Yeah  ,   yeah  ,   and there's no nap
¿Where is there no nap  ,   there  ?  
In  ,   uh  ,   there's no nap here
Oh  ,   there's no nap here  ,   no
In Spain there is
Yeah  ,   although
So  ,   well  ,   and ¿what do you think about politics  ?    ,   well  ,   i imagine Spaniards have many opinions about politics
Um  ,   well  ,   i don't know about the spanyards  ,   i don't have much
No
Man  ,   I have an opinion on Spain  ,   but here in the United States
Hmm  .  
I don't know the parties
yes yes well  ,   they're the democrats and they're the
or anything
they're the republicans and
and little more  ,   no  ?  
no  ,   we don't know which of the two is worse  ,   no  ?    they both have their good things and they have their bad things  .    But well  ,   and in Spain  ,   the no 
In Spain it's  ,   man  ,   I don't know what the difference is between the parties  ,   but there are also two that are the most important
yes  .  
that are  ,   they're called the Popular Party
Hmm  .  
and the Socialist Party
Aha  ,   aha  .  
Spanish Worker and  ,   they're pretty different  ,   the truth is that they govern the country in a way
yes  .  
I think that more than anything to contradict one another
yes  ,   yes I think tha 
When you're in the government  ,   the others don't do more  ,   they complain about anything they do
yes  .  
and when they themselves eh are in the government they dedicate to  ,   undo all that the last government has done
yes  .  
to be contrary  ,   I think so
Exactly   That  ,   yes  ,   here  ,   here is more or  ,   is the same  .   It is the same here  .  
yes  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  .  
And the democracy  ,   I don´t know  ,   really if  ,   if you could call  democracy when the elections
yes  .  
so when the parties those you can choose or not you do not like any  ,   yes  ,   well yeah
yes  .   Not specially  ,   eh  ,   see for example here even when I am in favor of the because the truth is that it has made many good things the Mayor of this place
Hmm  .  
has been very good  .   Originally he was democrat but he changed to republican
Hmm  .  
and well  ,   and now  ,   acts like with  ,   like a liberal  ,   many times
yes  .  
So  ,   then  ,   wait a second Hello  ?   Hello  ?  
yes  ,   so that  ,   you do not distinguish  ,   so there is not a pure thing there  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   no  ,   no  ,   it is not distinguished  ,   but at least him has been good for the city eh
Of course
because in this election are going to spend much money on TV Overhead announcements and advertisements
Mn  ,   yes that is very sad
now there is only one coming out every day in the newspaper
first thing he said is that God would make him win the election because
he said that it was in god´s hands
All this week was a mistake  ,   so everyone looks  at him like a clown
and what is its name  ?  
Oh  ,   Ferrer
Ferrer  ?  
He is puertorican  ,   from the Bronx
okay
yes  ,   he is a clown
here in the United States people critizes very much
well  ,   It has gotten better
good people no longer supports both parties
this city is a Democrat  ,   yet he is a Republican  ,   they are tired of Democrats
they have raised taxes
yes
so we have a mayor who is a Republican what is his Name  ?  
so he is also republican
So you tend to be more of the center  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   exactly
They compensate each other
yes  ,   yes  ,   so  ,   well  ,   and so I guess you miss a lot Spain
Eh  ,   well  ,   on one side I do  ,   but on the other side there so many good things here that I don't have much time left to miss
yes  ,   yes  ,   look  ,   we have a  ,   we have just refurbished the kitchen  ,   and I found  ,   online  ,   a boy who is good at
painting  ,   eh  ,   mm  ,   and plaster and everything  ,   but really good  ,   really good
Mhm
and he said  ,   look  ,   John I love my country and I miss it a lot but this country is giving me the chance to work hard  ,   I have my car  ,   I have my apartment that I have almost paid
and he is here  ,   I think he has been here for three years  ,   he is  ,   he hasn't been here too long
yes
but he works hard  ,   he is saving his money and he says 'here I have the chance wile there I couldn't  ,   because when it was not the taxes it was some other thing
Yes  ,   the situation in Spain is very bad for the young people
And could not  ,   and so that's how it is
because salaries are  ,   although the standard for living  ,   I mean the cost of living has raised a lot
yes
because  ,   because of the euro
yes
when we changed to euro  ,   everything raised  ,   up to a seventy percent
yes  ,   yes  ,   wow
some things went up
Wow  .  
and  ,   but the salaries didn't go up at all  .  
Mm  .  
they did the fair conversion to the salaries but not to the prices
yes  .  
then the salaries are very low and that's the first problem  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   yes  .  
but the second problem is that the houses  ,   the eh  ,   the price of the houses
Mm  .  
ah  ,   has been increasing since many years ago to some prices that are ridiculously high that nobody can afford to buy  ,   I mean the people that
that can buy a house are only the ones that are  ,   charging with the housing
yes  ,   yes  .  
the ones that buy  ,   the ones that buy houses to rent or to resell
yes  .  
they can't pay the house
yes  ,   that is what has happened here now in New York in the last five years  ,   the prices have been double
yes  .  
there aren't many renters  ,   so they aren't very expensive
And  ,   and  ,   and
here they're really expensive  ,   really expensive
And you haven't tried to find something outside of Manhattan  ?  
No  ,   I'm studying in a university  .  
Or you don't like it  ?    Ah  ,   what university are you in  ?  
En  ,   in Colombia  .  
Ah  ,   wow  ,   ah  ,   you're in uptown
Sure  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   but up  ,   up there  ,   up there in uptown you can  ,   Washington you can get  ,   eh
No  ,   the  ,   the university ones are cheaper  ,   but  ,   that's why I'm here  ,   but
yes  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   no  ,   eh  ,   they're
Almost unpayable in the lower part of New York  ,   they're simply expensive  ,   almost
yes  ,   yes  .  
and  ,   but in Spain there's a tradition of  ,   of buying the house  ,   people don't like to pay rent because it's money
Thrown away  ,   yes  ,   exactly  .  
because they can't  ,   because they both have to work  ,   the husband and the wife  ,   and they can't have kids
Hmm  .  
have kids and their family and little more  ,   well it's that  ,   you can't do this in Spain  .  
yes  .   And  ,   and God willing the parents give them a little money to start  ,   no  ?  
unless the parents are rich  .  
So the situation is very bad  ,   and this is why  ,   people are going like out in Europe
Hmm  .  
well many people are leaving
Wow  ,   um  .  
and that's one thing that those politicians right  ?   that had to solve it and is always being discussed
yes  .  
that are houses that they build and they sell them quite a lot cheaper  .  
is a disaster
Wow  ,   uh  .   Wow  ,   listen tell me  ,   have you found a good restaurant here  ?  
Mm  ,   I haven't looked  .  
You haven't looked  ?   I'm going to recommend you one  ,   is one that's in  ,   that's in the street eh  ,   in the tenth and first avenue
In tenth street and first avenue  ,   mm  .  
Really  ?   I mean that is Basque or  ,   or is
Yes  ,   Xunta  .   There  ,   you will feel with  ,   with your fellow countrymen very good  ,   eh  ,   is very  ,   how do you call it  ?   eh for the young people  ,   right  ?  
and they serve very delicious  ,   the  ,   the tapas are very delicious and is very  ,   What's the word  ?   Is very Eh  ,   fantastic  .   Right  ?   eh  ,   ah  ,   I'm looking for another eh  ,   eh  ,   bohemian
yes  .   Ah  ,   uh  .  
Is very bohemian You will like it  .  
yes  ,   so  ,   I recommend you by up there  ,   by up  ,   uptown the only thing there is are Dominican restaurants and and there's still some Cuban ones left  ,   which are quite good  ,   but
Spanish  ,   that I know  ,   by up there no
No
there isn't  ,   but Xunnta  ,   if  ,   if you have the chance of going with your friends eh  ,   to Xunta  ,   you will like it a lot
Okay  ,   Okay  ,   well I'll go  ,   I'll go to see  .  
because that gets full of  ,   of Spaniards
Well here in the university there's also a lot of Spaniards  ,   that no  ,   yes  ,   yes
Oh  ,   yes  ,   also  ?   you don't say  .  
Studying  ,   many  .  
Well  ,   let's talk a little more of politics that if not  ,   the call is not going to count
yes  ,   no  ,   no  ,   I don't have is that I've been doing this already a while that I've been doing this  ,   and  ,   no you know  ,   they
is  ,   first that you don't understand what  ,   what they are saying that  ,   I already wrote them an email the other day I told them listen
at least you should have put a person that speaks Spanish so that
yes  .  
to say  ,   so that it can be understood clearly  ,   he says no  ,   yes  ,   is that we didn't have and then we are going to look for one  ,   and are going to record it all again and
and I said well  ,   that's good  ,   but let me tell you that you can't understand anything some times  .  
yes  ,   exactly  ,   exactly  .   So  ,   anyway
yes  ,   yes  ,   also  ,   there have been many days the same topic so  ,   but well  ,   about the politics I think that  ,   at least this city is
is marching ahead  ,   is very safe the crime has decreased a lot and
the city is doing well  ,   but the country
yes  ,   same  ,   the country needs a lot of work  .  
This is Mayra talking  ,   What is your name  ?  
Annie
Annie
yes
Where do you live  ?  
in Miami and you  ?  
in Philadelphia
ah
hmm What was that topic  ,   the truth is that I don´t understand that recording  ?  
Neither do I  ,   it was something about politics  ,   I never understand what the topic is
No  ,   to me  ,   besides it talks so ugly that I don´t pay too much attention I try to don´t listen to it  .   The truth How are you  ?   What do you do  ?  
eh It is me  ,   I was a teacher but right now I have a twenty two months old daughter
Okay
and I have  ,   eh if God wishes we are going to have another  ,   eh  ,   November the first
Are you serious  ?  
yes
Congratulations
Thank you  ,   ¿and you  ?  
I'm a college student  ,   I'm just on my third year
¿What are you studying  ?  
Chemical Engineering
Wow
Uh  ,   here in Philadelphia  ,   so yes  ,   I'm dedicated to that most of the time
And ¿where are you from  ?  
I'm from Mexico  ,   from Mexico City
Right
I just moved like three years ago just to study  ,   ¿and you  ?  
So  ,   uh  ,   i was born in Puerto Rico but my fathers came to the United States when i was five years old
Oh  ,   OK
So uh  ,   I've lived in Miami for almost all my life
And you go back to Puerto Rico a lot  ,   don't you  ?  
Oh
Yeah  ,   you go back to Puerto Rico often  ,   don't you  ?  
No  ,   not much because i was born in Puerto Rico  ,   but my parents are actually Dominicans  ,   so
Oh  ,   OK
The whole family is Dominican but I'm
mm
you know  ,   the lady that raised me was Puerto Rican
okay
you know  ,   I have like a mix of both
okay  ,   how interesting
well and
And
how is the politic let's say in Mexico  ,   that I'm not  ,   I don't know much  .  
how is the politic in Mexico I think that right now is in one of the worst moments  ,   because not long ago  ,   we had always had the same party  ,   the Pri  ,   for like seventy years
aha aha
And it barely changed with Fox I mean the president that we have now  .   But what has happened  ,   is that everybody had the hope that it was seriously going to be different
aha
And it has been much worse than before  ,   in other words  ,   he hasn't done anything that they used to do before  And the little good that the government did before  ,   he doesn't do it anymore
then we just had a change for worse then the people already don't
wow
don't care at all now  ,   they are already disappointed
aha
that they don't even pay too much attention to the politic  ,   they are not interested anymore in voting  ,   is already like whoever it is they know that it will be bad  ,   so they don't care too much  .  
wow
mm And here  ,   did you vote here oh
oh yes  ,   of course
they voted
yes  ,   I'm not really into it right now because I have a small child and I live for her
yes  ,   I believe you do
so  ,   oh  ,   politics  ,   you know  ,   I  ,   I don't really know if it's okay or wrong but what I do like is that at least  ,   oh
people can say what they think
mhm
I know that in my parent's country  ,   the Dominican Republic  ,   it wasn't always like that  ,   I don't know if it's like that now or not  ,   you know  ,   you have had that problem in Mexico too  ,   right  ?  
yes
but  ,   I was raised in a way in which politics were not discussed for that same reason
really  ?  
yes
Okay
so  ,   you know  ,   I speak with my husband but we don't discuss politics
You don't talk about many
I don't give my opinions about it or anything like that because you know  ,   where they come from  ,   you weren't able to say what you thought about
the party in power  ,   it could cause you lots of problems
yes  ,   that's right
so  ,   oh
yes  ,   they don't use that in Mexico
aha
I mean it hasn't happened as strong as in these countries
aha
But I don't know I say  ,   the people in Mexico depends  ,   if they're interested in politics and all that they talk about that
aha
but what I've seen is that the majority are a little  ,   well
ah  ,   I can't hear you too good
No  ,   already better  ,   no
no still like every other word comes
ah  ,   is that my phone doesn't have very good reception here but  ,  
it's a little bit better now
yes I was saying that in Mexico there's not that much but that not many people talk about that anyways because they worry more about working and just being healthy and all that
aha
but instead of talking  ,   but I think that is a little more although Mexico is kind of conservative in the sense of the moral and the family and how to live and all  .  
mm
generally I think they tend to be a little more liberal
mm
I mean is not like here  ,   that you see that the liberals have an idea of the economy  ,   well  ,   a different idea of how to do things that  ,   that are totally different
aha aha
yes they all have similar ideas And there it goes  ,   and then I don't know perhaps that makes things a little bit harder for me
similar But also here it looks a little either you are of one side or you're from another  .  
yes
I stand in the middle and that's a little complicated because nobody  ,   nobody likes extremes  .   I mean I couldn't choose just one extreme  .  
mm
then I don't know But if you want let's change topic  ,   we can talk about whatever something you do like to talk about
eh  ,   eh  ,   like what  ?  
um  ,   I don't know what does your husband do  ,   for example
eh  ,   he works  ,   for the justice department  ,   he works in a prison  .  
ah  ,   really
yes and he
that must be hard  ,   and how long have you been married  ?  
is    eh thirteen or fourteen years
ah  ,   seriously
mm
wow that's a lot that's great  ,   congratulations also
thanks  ,   And how do you like the United States  ?  
yes I like it eh  ,   I've found somethings that I don't
Like what  ?  
but in general I'm liking it like eh  ,   the society seems very different for example when I go out to dance and all that
mm
I do not like dancing here  ,   the atmosphere makes it inappropriate
it not fun and easy as in Mexico
mhm
I don´t like hanging out with friends who are not Latinos
okay
they are different from other people who usually do not like what they do but I like to work
I like to see how the world works
yes
you live well  ,   you have opportunities  ,   but I am not used to it
yes
although the more you work things are not going to get better
mhm
here the difference is if you want to have more you can actually do it
mhm
so I just want to be here and make my life here
for what  ?  
because it is good to know that there are opportunities
there is also a lot of fear in the society by terrorism
mhm
also having all these international problems do not make me feel comfortable
Uh huh
And besides  ,   I'm not american  ,   so it's even harder to me
Yes
to get used to that
¿And how much time do you have left  ?  
To finish  ?    ,   i don't know  ,   it must be like  ,   i hope two years
Right
But maybe I'll take a little bit more because i want to do a couple minors to  .    .   and i don't know  ,   let's see  ,   ad i don't know  ,   working  ,   or i also have to wait
or if i better go to another country  ,   it all depends  ,   [it's not] just about the money
Hello  ,   i can't  ,   i can't hear you again
Right  ,   no  ,   that  ,   here the ones who have money are below and i think i want to live
right
Hello  ,   hi  .  
Hello  ,   hi  .    Eh  ,   who is this  ?  
Don't tell me it's Miguel Angel  .  
Hello  ,   Fina  .    How are you  ?  
How great  ,   no  ?  
How nice  .    I'm very happy to be able to talk with you  .  
Yeah  ,   I recognized your voice  ,   yes  .    How are you  ?    You know that I lost your telephone number  .    I was
yes  .  
My god  ,    but yes  ,   I left it here  .    So  So it finally showed up  ,   and
Wow  ,   Ah  ,   yes  .  
and  ,   after I was about to call you  ,   but this week has been crazy  .  
Me too  ,   I've had a lot of work  ,   well  ,   it called me  ,   this Fisher machine called me  ,   the one that speaks normally  ,   and
And I didn't hear anything they asked  .  
nothing  ,   nothing  .    And  ,   and I couldn't even answer  .   Because  ,   I tell you that I had a week  ,   also  ,   incredible week of work  .    You know  ?  
yes  ,   Right  ?    So  ,   so you're studying really hard  .  
Hmm  .    Yes because I spent all day in the laboratory  .    You know  ?  
And how  ,   how did your plans work out  ,   your hypothesis  ,   your theory  ,   your  ,  
So  ,  
your experiments
Well  ,   well  ,   at the moment  .   at the moment it is going well  ,   what happens  ,   is that  ,   of course  ,   it requires much work  ,   because everything  ,   eh  ,   are new things  ,   all are reactions  ,   new products
nobody has done before  .   Do you know  ?   then  ,   lets say
Oh  ,   but how clever  .  
you go as a pioneer right  ?   for the life  .  
Man  ,   of course  ,   see it  ,   of the future I know  ,   but  ,   but at work  ,   the present is very good because  ,   because I do what I like most  ,   and  ,   and to me  ,   it is something very interesting  .  
and so  .   Oh boy  ,   well  ,   fantastic  ,   I don´t  I don´t
I have not done very much  ,   because I live with my dad  .   Do you see it  ?   He  ,   he is very old  .   Then  ,  
I practically am who takes care of him and
Of course  .   So that  ,   you have double job  ,   out of home and at home  ,   of course
Of course  ,   of course  ,   yes  ,   and Is your father  ,   is you father  ,   so  ,   is he fine  ,   so  ,   do you take care of him because he is sick  ?  
He has  ,   memory problems  .  
Ah  ,   yeah  .  
but  ,   however  ,   he is alone all the  ,   all the  ,   practically  .  
And then  ,   I call him every now and then  ,   and I'm at least  ,   I'm an agitation  ,   with the people that come tomorrow from repair  .  
They are going to put new windows in all the  ,   in this apartment  ,   and  ,   and everything has been
Ah  ,   to put windows  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   Because you  ,   you live here in  ,   in Philadelphia in the city  ,   or you live outside  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   in  ,   in  ,   Is a street that's more to the northeast Right  ?  
Mm  ,   Northeast  ?  
Six  ,   nine  ,   six  ,   nine  ,   zero  ,   six
Okay  ,   I'm not  ,   I'm not in the same one  ,   but yes  .  
that is like the sun  ,   rising sun  .   Right  ?  
Okay  ,   okay  .  
Um  ,   is an apartment  ,   but it has  ,  
Mm  .  
mm  ,   quite a few years  ,   and I like the location  ,   because of that  ,   that my dad is calm here  ,   no  ,  
Aha  .   Sure  .   Well  ,   but  ,   but he can manage on his own  ,   I mean  ,   you don't have to  .  
Sure  .   Sure  .   And besides the food  ,   is important that he doesn't make it  ,   because he has memory problems  ,   you know what happens right  ?   well  ,   you are a psychologist  ,   you know  .  
It can cause a fire  ,   of course
He doesn't do anything himself  ,   it must be because he knows it  ,   right  ?  
Sure  ,   he knows he has memory lapses
since the doctor talked to him   ,   yes  ,   oh
And  ,   how old is your father  ?  
Ninety two
Wow  .   Congratulations  ,   be happy he is still alive
Thank you  ,   yes  .   I
Congratulations  ,   congratulations  ,   how good  .  
Aha
And then
Did your mother die old also  ?  
she was seventy nine when she died
Well  ,   well  ,   no  ,   well  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   but
Forty eight  .   He is about ten years older than her
I see  ,   I see
Oh  ,   mm  ,   eh  ,   so  ,   I say that  ,   well  ,   I am thinking of putting him a person  ,   right  ?   I mean  ,   putting him a
Sure  ,   sure  ,   maybe a person  ,   or
even if it's for an hour  .   But  ,   is that he is the one that doesn't want to  .  
okay  .   But  .   You know what happens  ?   that the  ,   the people look  ,   I'm going to tell you a case which is very similar to yours  ,  
if  if we get disconnected I'll call you  ,   aha  ,   aha
Okay  ,   okay  ,   well  ,   look  ,   my grandmother is eighty nine years old  .  
Mm  .  
But  ,   but  ,   this past summer  ,   I don't know if I told you  ,   but she was very ill and we thought that already it didn't  ,   didn't count it you know  ?   Because  ,   she stopped eating  ,   already
Okay
no  ,   she was dehydrated  .   Well  ,   well  ,   that she was already going  ,  
Ah  ,   my God  .   How old  ,   how old was she  ,   sorry  ?   That you didn't tell me  .  
eighty nine  ,   she's eighty nine  .  
And  ,   and well  ,   and like that Right  ?   The thing is that my mom  ,   of course  ,   she couldn't be in the house anymore  ,  
Ah  .  
because  ,   because is that  ,   a person that you already have to feed  ,   that you already have to do everything to  ,  
They would get into trouble  .  
Aha
doing big drama  ,   how good  ,  
yes
And  ,   now she has taken her to a residence  ,   where she is enjoying
Oh
they treat her like a queen
Oh  ,   what a luck
And  ,   ah  ,   and she spent the first week crying  ,   where have you put me  ?   but now she is enjoying it  ,   she doesn't want to leave
Oh  ,   so happy
Old people  ,   you know what is their problem  ?   they are very reluctant to such things  ,   but afterwards  ,   once they are in  ,   they enjoy it
I tell you because
I tell you
if you think that your father will be better in the company of someone  ,   stop thinking about it and do it  .   Because in the beginning he won't like it  ,   and will make some drama
I die
But then  ,   then  ,   he'll thank you
Mhm
Because being alone all day long  ,   that's not good  .   Because  ,   being alone  ,   no  ,   it's much better being with somebody  ,   or somewhere  ,   you know  ?  
Well  ,   so far  ,   thanks God  ,   I have been alright in this  ,   and I get apid
Sure  ,   sure
I even get paid to take care of him  .   There are a lot of things here
Ah  ,   look  ,   very good  .  
Like some help  ,   a subsidy  ,   no  ?  
yes  ,   so he can be with me and that  .    So  ,  
Ah  ,   how nice  .    How nice  .  
I say that  ,   so well  ,   while he can  .    But  ,   in time  .  
that are  ,   senior citizen residences  ,   but they're  ,   sure  .  
They're places where  ,   ah  ,   he doesn't speak English  ,   sure  ,   sure  ,   sure  .  
So  ,   he doesn't want to because if he gets lost  ,   because they'll come to look for him and everything  .    No  ?  
Yeah  ,   yeah  .  
And they take him and they bring him  .    But  ,   so  ,  
but the chauffeur doesn't speak Spanish  ,   the chauffeur  ,   so he says  ,   and if I don't
yes  ,   really  ?   Listen  ,   and there isn't something  ,   there isn't something  ,   there isn't one of these day centers that speak Spanish  ?   There isn't  ?   For the Spanish speaking community  .  
There in the center  .   There are places that speak Spanish  ,   the inside ones  .  
Sure  ,   because I think there has to be  ,   eh  ,   there has to be  .  
Okay  ,  
Is what I was thinking of doing next  ,   being with him  ,   there a while with that  ,  
Mm  .   Sure  .  
And  ,   then  ,   well  ,  
And that the people see  ,   and that he talks
that the people see you  ,   you stay with him a while  ,   and like that  ,   at the end  ,   he will ask you for it  .   At the end  ,   he will be the one who will tell you  ,   Fina  ,  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   Then  ,   my mom  ,   eh  ,   also got me a little  because when they got here  ,   I would say  ,   she would tell him  ,   Josefina is going to put is in a
in a home  ,   here they call it a home  .   A nursing home  .  
I would tell her  ,   but mom  ,   Why do you tell me that  ?  
  .  
Ah  ?  
No  ,   that is that  ,   a company  ,   excuse me  ,   they are asking me something  .  
No  ,   God  ,   no  .  
she has him traumati well  ,   they were both like that with that fear  .   And  ,   me no  ,   ah  ,   I say  ,   how that you are going But  ,   that  ,   of doing it  ,   would be a fabulous thing that  ,   that he would love  .   Right  ?  
Ah  .  
Okay  ,   okay
he tell me  ,   that  ,   I'm a nuisance for you  ,   that I don't know   ah  ,   my God  ,   is a drama  .  
Ah  ,   the elderly people  ,   really  ,   eh  .   That  ,   that  ,   become like small children  .  
Right  ?  
yes  ,   I don't want to torture him either  .  
Mm  .  
They become very dependent  .   They become yes  ,   I mean  ,   they are very old  ,   but they become like babies  .  
Ah  ,   is a  ,   is a  ,   is a regression  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   My grandmother  ,   the same  .   My mom went on vacation this summer  ,   and well  ,   and you're leaving  ,   you're leaving me alone  ,  
what value does that have  ,   I mean that  ,   my mom had been without a vacation  ,   two years already  .   You know  ?  
Aha  .   Oh  ,   Can you imagine  ?  
Your mom is young  ?  
My mom no  .   My mom is already  ,   well  ,   she turned seventy this year  .  
And  ,   you have older siblings  ?  
yes  ,   yes  .   I have my brother who lives here in New York  ,  
Ah  ,   yes  .   The one from New York  ,   aha  .  
ah  ,   You are the youngest  ?  
Well  ,   the youngest  ,   that I'm already thirty years old also  ,   but
Ah  ,   thirty  .  
But yes  .   But  ,   I'm always the smallest  ,   sure  .  
It doesn't look like it
yes
I  ,   do consider myself young  .   But  ,   then I see the  ,   the undergrads here in the university  ,   I say  ,   goodness  ,   no way  ,   how young  .   And  ,   I eighteen years again  .  
Oh  ,   yes  .  
And I remember when I was eighteen years old  ,   and started the university  .  
yes  .   And when do you have vacations  ?  
Me never  .   Here  ,   never  .   There are no vacations  ,   no  .   But  ,   maybe in Christmas a few day  .   You know  ?   in  ,   in summer a week  .   But  ,   well  .  
Officially I don't have vacations  .   You know  ?  
That is what  .   Ah  ,   my boss is  PhD  ,   but in  ,  
In Clinical Psychology  ,   imagine now  ,   right  ?  
And you told me that the  ,   the PhD is not so  ,   ¿how's that  ?    ,   like the masters where you have to study a lot  ,   but
Yes  ,   the PhD is more about doing your own research
It's something else
I mean  ,   it's more  ,   a more creative process  ,   ¿right  ?  
Uh huh  ,   yeah  ,   and doing the  ,   a thesis  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   it's a
Study more  ,   sure  ,   the thesis  ,   the thesis
Oh  ,   and ¿is it just you or are you doing it with someone else  ?  
I'm doing it  ,   i mean  ,   it's my own  ,   i have my own project  ,   but well  ,   I'm here  .   I work with other people researching  ,   ¿you know  ?    ,   but my  ,   my project is mine  .   I mean  ,   no  ,   no one else is doing it  .   I mean  ,   it's an original research
¿And on what year will you finish it  ?  
Well  ,   look  ,   I'm on second year  ,   so it's up to  ,   it's five years to finish  ,   but  ,   well  ,   i still have four left
Oh
I just started my second year  ,   yes
Oh boy  ,   ¿and do you go out as a doctor after that  ?  
Sure  ,   well  ,   i hope so  ,   if not  ,   they'll kick my ass
I don't think so  ,   i think you'll make it
No  ,   i don't think so either  ,   but well  ,   you never know
Oh  ,   i was gonna ask you your e mail
Yes
and i was going to give you mine
Okay  ,  
Because  ,   sometimes I'm on the computer  ,   and say  ,   ah  ,   if I had  ,  
I'll give you mine  ,   write it down  .  
aha  .   Let's see if  ,   if we have enough time here  .   What is it  ?  
Look  ,   is is  MVLAS  ,  
 MV of  ,    V of cow  ?  
no  ,    B of donkey  .  
um e 
Good evening  ,   I'm Joe
Hello  ,   this is Patrick
I had the feeling that they were going to put us together again  .  
yes
How is  how was your day  ,   how did it go  ?  
Good  ,   well  ,   it  ,   it's Friday  ,   and we are eating pizza in my p   ,   parents house
Ah  ,   that's sgood
yes  .   And you  ?  
Is it pretty down there  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   the weather  ,   today was very  ,   very  ,   very good  .  
And here it was warm ans shinny  .   And well  ,   I'm alone  ,   but  ,   also  ,   I went out to eat  ,   so  ,   I'm very happy  .   The I was watching television right now  ,   to see what's going on  .  
yes
Well  ,   what else  ,   we'll talk about politics  ,   ah  ?  
yes  ,   well  ,   what else can we talk about  ?  
Patrick  ?  
Ay  ,   I don't know  ,   let's see  ,   ah
Well I know that  ,   well  ,   they show in television of  ,   something about  ,   political changes  ,   um  .   I know what they are doing  ,   there is a republican guy
that made pejorative comments about black race  .   So  ,   has been criticised a lot  .   He is  ,   I think he has a radio show  .   o I think that the  ,   the president said something about that he didn't want  ,  
So  ,   the White House was not involved in his comments  ,   or something like that
Hmm  .  
those who are going to have kids  ,   that they abort them  ,   and then crime will be reduced  .    Pretty stupid commentary  .  
Well yes  ,   this is like  ,   but was it last night we talked  ?  
yes  .  
No  ,   really it's that they have so much dominance  ,   that in reality  ,   they're really relaxed in the ways that they manage their issues  .    like  ,   that they don't catch with  ,  
yes  ,   yes  .  
Well  ,   it's something that I dislike a lot  .    At the same time they were talking in the news about all the people who died in Iraq this week  .  
yes  ,   yes
Like  ,   this issue of the war keeps being a really sad issue  ,   and how they say in English  ,   uh  ,   well  ,   for president  ,   because in reality
they're letting him continue to do this  .  
Well  ,   so the
yes  .   I think  ,   I think that they should put p   ,   like a  ,   a  ,   one of the rules that must change is the
As in the past there was a lot of pollution y a lot of politicians knew that the companies were throwing out ans still do it but not at a great scale as before  ,   that
they disposed of the contaminated products  ,   the eh
yes
waste like they say in English  ,   they throw it out in areas that could affect the community
yes
In fact here in Colorado there are several areas that underground  ,   well  ,   well  ,   well they pollute the water  ,   that's because  ,   of the things they buried that
they was a lot  ,   even radioactivity too  .  
And now I was talking with my girl also  .   Are you with your mom today  ?  
yes
Fridays and Saturdays  ,   and half of the Sundays
yes  ,   all of the week  ?  
More or less  ,   no  ,    half of the week  .   Thursday  ,   Thursday to
I mean  ,   do you have the same schedule every week  ?   Thursday to  .    .  
Friday  ?   Oh that's cool
yes  ,   yes
And mine stays with me on Tuesdays  ,   Thursdays and sometimes from Friday to Saturday or from Saturday to Sunday
That's fine
I mean  ,   but it's always three times a week
Oh  ,   that's fine
yes  ,   I enjoy a lot the company of my little daughter  .   Do you have only one  ,   Patrick  ?  
yes  ,   just one
yes  .   How old is she  ?  
Five years  ?  
Oh  ,   oh yes  ,   just like mine  ,   right  .   But you are younger than me  ,   aren't you Patrick  ?   How old are you  ?  
I am twenty six  ,   twenty seven years old
Twenty seven  .   I am twenty years older than you  .   I am forty  .  seven  .   I had my daughter when I was already old  .   But my girl fills me with energy  .   She is my inspiration  ,   actually
We get along well in the sense of be  being like parents right  .   We don't get along as spouses but we get along well like  ,   like parents of the girl  .   We work well together  .  
yes
Oh  ,   mm  .  
At least ha 
Because even though she would like  ,   it's true that she would like to see us both together again  ,  
yes  .  
because that would affect her a lot  .  
I have seen that a lot in other  ,   ah  ,  
yes  .  
yes  ,   that specially in houses
yes
but
and they are well
seasoned  .  
yes  .  
yes  ,   yes  .   yes  ,   it's like they have a  ,   a  ,   sixth sense at  ,   at times  .  
or at least in front of her  ,   so that it does not affect her  .   Because we are very conscious as well that if  ,   say  ,   we have some discord  ,   we begin to discuss that in front of her  ,   well  ,   it will affect
yes  .   yes  .  
That this  ,   this always affects me a great deal  .  
You know all the expenses that one
discriminate no  ,   a little  ,   I suppose  ,  
yes  ,   they discriminate a lot against men  .   And it's true that there's a bunch of scoundrels ah by there  ,   but the laws discriminate a lot against the men  .  
I mean  ,   instead of like that like me  ,   yes  .  
But  ,   nothing  .  
And yes I enjoy that a lot  ,   I would love to have her every day  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   And
And since the girl is growing up eh  .   Do you and your ex wife get along well  ?  
yes  .   Yes for us too
yes  ,   yes  ,   already  ,   already we
yes
we understand us better and and  ,   ah  ,   well  ,   our first thing is to take care of her  ,   our
Of course  ,   of course  .   Have you married again Patrick  ?  
What  ?  
Did you married again  ,   or  ?  
Who  ?  
You  ,   you  .   After the divorce  ,   did you found someone  ?  
Um  ,   no  ,   she goes out with some  ,   sometimes she has boyfriends  ,   but never have been like that  .  
Oh  .  
Well I  ,   I  ,   I do have a girlfriend we have been together for five months right now  .  
Oh yes  ?  
And  ,   I like her a lot  ,   and
How good  .  
we get along very well right now  .  
How nice  .   That is good  .  
Ah  .  
yes  ,   it is very difficult  .  
¿Yes  ?  
But this  ,   i mean  ,   with the one I'm with now
Yes
Uh  ,   also has a daughter that's six years old and also  ,   kinda  ,   the same thing happened  ,   ¿right  ?  
Yes
So  ,   it's like  ,   we understand each other very well in that aspect  ,   right  ?  
that's good
of  ,   of how things are and
¿Do you know her  ?    ,   yes
and  ,   i think  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   she's very cool and
That's good  ,   that's good  ,   when you find someone good like that and that you get along fine  ,   and love each other very much  ,   that's very important
Yes  ,   and it's also  ,   uh  ,   she's also a good mom  ,   luckily
That too  ,   even more important
Because  ,   uh  ,   i see  ,   i see  ,   i see how she treats her daughter  ,   and she treats her very good
She treats her baby well  ,   the
yes  ,   yes  ,   very well
That's good
Good evening  ,   from New York  .  
Hello  ,   eh  ,   from New York too  .  
Ah  ,   which part of New York  ?  
Eh  ,   Manhattan  .  
Oh  ,   how good  .   Are you Spanish  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   are you John  ?  
yes  ,   we talked last night  .   Oh  .  
yes  ,   eh  ,   we talked yesterday and   ,   we have to talk of the same thing
yes  ,   I know  ,   then  ,   now I think that I know what are we going to do  .   Ouch  .  
I don´t know what  ,   no  ,   I don´t know so and what  ,   how are you doing today  ?   a very beautiful day  ,   right  ?  
Ah  ,   eh  ,   I have not go out from house yet
Oh  ,   right  ?   Ah  ,   were you out until late last night  ?  
No  .  
No  ?  
No  ,   but I had to work  ,   well to study and I have not gone out
Oh  ,   yes  ?   Oh  ,   And what do you work in  ?  
Study  .  
Ah  ,   ah  ,   you are studying  .   yes  ,   well that's what you had told me in Colombia right  ?  
Uh um yes  .  
Ah  ,   wow  .   Wow  .   Well  ,   then  ,   how do we talk about the topic today  ?   Because the truth is that is going to be hard I already think that yesterday we covered it
What already had to be said  .  
almost everything
Well  ,   yes  ,   well I have a question  ,   you
Tell me  .  
think there should be more parties  ?   Would you like it if there were other parties  ?  
Um  ,   well  ,   yes  ,   it wouldn't be a bad idea eh  ,   have one but there have been parties the only thing that just that the parties eh  ,   the other parties there have been  ,   have no strength at all
yes  .  
But there are other parties  ,   there's the liberal party  ,   there's well eh  ,   other small parties  .  
yes  ,   but  ,   uh  ,   do you like the other parties  ,   better  ,    ,   than the bigger ones  ?  
No the truth is that the politic is so is so hard  ,   right  ?  
Um  .  
that  ,   well at least the possibility of choosing one or another that has ideas  ,   eh  ,   eh  ,   obviously is better than having a
Dictator  ,   oh  ,   yes  .  
a dictator right  ?   that is what he says and there's no opinion at all I mean  ,   but like we were talking yesterday  ,   the  ,   the parties are more or less the same  ,   they have similar ideas
one want to cut a little more  ,   others want to cut a little less and and well  ,   so
yes  ,   the good thing that the democracy has perhaps is that if something really is bad for  ,   eh  ,   ah  ,   ah  ,   uh  ,   the people  ,   they really don't like it
Uhum  .  
always ways from  ,   to avoid it  ,   it's really bad  .  
With a dictator you can't  ,   a dictator
Uhum  .  
Exactly  .  
yes  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   for example  ,   the mayor here  ,   he did something that I really didn't like because and you know  ,   you have your freedom and you can live your
life as you want but he took away the freedom of the people because they can't smoke in the restaurants  .  
And I don't smoke  ,   no  ?  
No  .  
But  ,   I think that they do have a separate area in which the ones that like to smoke  ,   they can do it  ,   I think that obviously  ,   I don't like it when they are in the other table and you are and I
oh  ,   I just started eating and it is over and they are smoking and they are blowing the smoke  ,   the smoke right at your face  .  
when I'm eating  ,   you know  ?   But  ,   yes  ,   in general  ,   if they choose a place in the restaurant and they go  ,   this part
you can smoke but well then  ,   smoke  ,   and the bars too  ,   there's a bar in which  ,   everyone is smoking so I had to
the smoke bothers you  ,   well you go since there are so many bars in  ,   in New York  ,   well if you don't like
Hum  .    Sure but what happens is that you're if your friends smoke  ,   then
yes  ,   well also  .  
But I think that  ,   if I choose this it because I want people to permanently stop smoking  ,   because it's bad for their health  .  
Well yes  ,   but it's bad for the  ,   the  ,   the health  ,   I agree but so  ,   eh  ,   if we're going to start there  ,   how many other things are bad for the health  ,   so are we going to start to
to take them from people all the vices that there are in the world that are bad for you  ?    Drinking is also bad for you  ,   if you drink in excess  ,   no  ?  
yes  .  
So what  ,   what's the next thing to do  ?    Not let people drink  .  
No  ,   sure  ,   there are some  ,   from this place there are many things in the
You know  .  
life that are bad and you can't prohibit everything  .  
but the same with the drugs that are very bad  .  
They're prohibited
yes  .  
yes  .  
is not like the alcohol  .   The alcohol if you drink it in moderation well it does very little harm  .   The cigarette even if you take it in moderation is bad  .  
but if this will promote that the people each time smoke less and that the young people don't smoke who they are always
is when the people start  ,   when they are young and don't have the judgement still well
Well  ,   yes
formed  ,   they start to smoke and then they can't they can't quit smoking  .  
I don't find it so bad  .  
Um  .  
who is young also  ,   she's twenty four years old has never smoked either  ,   and doesn't drink either  ,   she doesn't like alcohol  .  
Uh huh  .  
don't call attention  ,   don't have enough personality to say I don't need to smoke
yes  ,   yes  .  
Uh huh  .  
in Spain  ,   people smoke so much
I know  .    No  ,   in Spain  ,   I know that sometimes
you don't smoke  ,   and you've smoked like  ,   as if you were addicted to tobacco  .  
And this seemed really bad to me  .  
was incredible how  ,   how they smoke in Spain  ,   and how they smoke in Europe  .  
No  ?   Eh  ,   so But  ,   eh  ,   anyway eh  ,   I  ,   I think that they should  ,   also should have their decision of where  ,   where they can smoke  ,  that there should be their
restaurants or there should be bars where they say  ,   well okay  ,   in these bars you can smoke  ,   right  ?   Or they have a space to smoke  .  
Um  ,  
Because they also have rights too  ,   if  ,   if they want to die  ,   well but one dies in they way that one wants  .   Whether  ,   whether is drinking or whether is
Okay  .   But the bad thing is that it affects the rest  ,   is that is not just him but also the
That's the problem  .   Sure  .  
Right  ?   But  ,   I think that's already a little too much because
But the people that smoke complain too much  ,   because I ah  ,   I don't know how long you've been here but the people  ,   I see  ,   ah that they accept it
quite well  ,   you always see in the bars even in the winter  ,   the people smoking outside
yes  ,   aha  .  
and it doesn't seem to bother them too much  ,   it doesn't seem like it
yes  ,   yes but like  ,  
I don't know
yes  ,   but like you  ,   like I told you is one of those things of  ,   of the politics that I think has already crossed the line  ,   right  ?  
yes  .  
That  ,   at least in finding a way to accommodate them  ,   eh in  ,   in  ,   in some way  .   Which  ,   which is what we had before that
Um  .  
But anyway  ,   and  ,   I don't know  ,   don't you ever think of founding your own party when you see the politicians doing it all so bad  ?  
Oh  ,   eh  ,   look  ,   eh  ,   ah  ,   I don't like it specially in this country  ,   eh  ,  m  I never messed with politics because  ,   eh  ,   the press  ,   the press I really don't like here because they can't
hold back
Um
and they start airing all the dirty laundry because they think that they are acting with interest Who were you sleeping with before  ?   What did you smoke  ,   didn't smoke
yes  .  
and well  ,   that honestly that to me  ,   if I become a politician I want them to judge me
For what I do in the politics  ,   and not for your private life  ,   right  ?  
No  ?   Exactly  ,   for  ,   for my ability to carry the country or carry the state eh  ,   my experience
Sure  .  
but not what I do in  ,   in  ,   in my private life  ,   that for me
But you don't think that perhaps is not so much I don't know the media  ,   but rather the others  ,   the opposition and the other parties who are interested
in getting that out
Both  ,   because the press here also eh  ,   has divided in  ,   in a press of  ,   of democrats and of republican press  .  
Uh um  .  
So Fox for example is  ,   they lean to the right and the New York Times  ,   leans to the left  .   Right  ?   Then you are reading
eh  ,   from the point of view of  ,   of the left or the right  .   And  ,   the press should be  ,   um  ,   must be neutral  .   Right  ?   Report
the events how they are not from a  ,   from a political point of view  ,   of the left or the right and they don't  ,   and is not what they do  .  
The New York Times  ,   channel twelve  ,    CBS are  ,   they lean a lot to the left right  ?   eh  ,   they fired that guy  ,   Dan Rather who was
the most important for many years who was in CBS like in  ,   in  ,   in the nightly news they fired him because they tried to get out eh  ,   before  ,   a few weeks before Bush's election
they tried to come out with a report that was fabricated  ,   eh
Hi
Good afternoon  ,   Mildred from Connecticut
Hi  ,   good afternoon  ,   I'm Miguel Angel  ,   ¿what's your name  ,   what did you say your name was
Mildred
Oh  ,   Mildred  ,   right
I live in Connecticut
In Connecticut  ,   oh  ,   very well  ,   my name is Miguel Angel  ,   I'm here in Philadelphia
Right  ,   OK
Yes  ,  
¿How's everything there  ,   good  ?  
Good  ,   very good  .   We have a great day  ,   sunny  ,   and a little hot too  ,   uh huh
Oh  ,   it's cold here
Yes  ,   it's  ,   sure  ,   you're further north  .   Very well  ,   where  ,   ¿where are you from  ,   where are you from  ,   Mildred  ?  
It's starting to  .    .    .   Puerto Rican
Right  ,   oh  ,   yeah  ,   that's good  ,   ¿how many years have you been there  ?  
Yes  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   just a year  .   Uh huh  ,   just one year  ,   I'm studying here  ,   so  ,   i'm doing a doctorate  ,   ¿you know  ?  
¿In what  ?  
You are going to earn good money  .  
Ah  ,   we will see  .   You never know  .   And what do you do  ?  
And  ,   do you participate into politics  ?   I am  ,   I am not working now  ,   but I work in a bank  .  
Are you  ,   are you sick leave  ,   are you sick  ,   or have you had a child  ,   or  ?  
No  ,   I am resting  ,   resting  ,  no  ,   look  ,   my  ,   my boyfriend is earning good money  ,   so I don´t need to work now  .   So
Oh  ,   how good  ,   how good  .   How lucky  ,   hear  .   Some of you have luck  ,   eh  .   There are some with luck  .  
That is good  ,   very good  .   How long have you been in the United States  ?  
So
My brother lives in New York  .  
Oh  .  
And  ,   he has been  ,   well  ,   yes  ,   like fifteen  ,   fifteen  ,   fourteen or fifteen years  ,   too  .   So  ,   yes  ,   he has been here for a long time  ,   and that is what made me decide to come  .   Do you know  ?  
Ah  ,   and do you vote  ?   Are you a voter  ,   or not  ?  
But  ,   I can' vote  ,   no  ,   no  .   I don't have  ,  
Oh  ,   that you are  ,   this  ,  
no  ,   I have a visa of  ,  
residency  .  
student  .   Right  ?   I have a
a  J one a  J one  ,   sure  .   I can't  ,   I can't vote  ,   no  .   It also wouldn't interest me to vote  ,   because  ,   honestly  ,   how things are  ,   so  ,   you can  .  
Well  ,   but  ,   I don't find that he's done a bad job  .   What happens is that  ,   in many things  ,   you know  ,   each  ,   each  ,   how do you say it  ?   each leader that is chosen  ,   if he doesn't  ,   if he doesn't work with all from his party  ,   things don't come out too good  .  
Understand  ?   And  ,   there are more  ,   I think that there are more republicans in  ,   in the
yes  .  
I don't know if in the senate or the chamber  .  
and  ,   well  ,   the laws  ,   is not the same  ,   understand  ,   that when all the democrats are in power  ,  
yes  .  
when you choose a leader who is working with groups that are not of their same party  ,   is very hard  .  
Very hard  ,   for you to be able to make decisions  ,  
mm  .  
Okay  ,   I mean  ,   Do yo say it because of the chamber  ?  
So
But  ,   now  ,   there  ,   the majority is republican  .   Right  ?   Or not  ?  
Aha  .  
I don't know  ,   I don't know  .   I ask  .  
Now there's a republican majority  .   And  ,   you say that
they take longer in appro  passing the laws  ,   in approving the laws  .  
Okay  .  
eh  ,   if it was the democratic party  ,   well  ,   then  ,   they agree  ,   understand  ?   no let's work  ,   or let's find a way  ,  
And why  ,   and why do you think  ,   why do you think that is  ,   why do you think that the democrats agree more than the republicans
Well  ,   because is all  ,   is all  ,   is as if the republicans were in power  ,   if the republicans are in power  ,   and all the cabinet is republican  ,  
Okay  .  
Yeah  ,   yeah  .  
But  ,   if you have from other parties  ,   you will always fine  ,   eh  ,   an opposition  ,   you know  ?    It's  ,   co  ,   it's not  ,   it's not only one thing  .  
It's like when you're studying or working  ,   you're in a job  ,  
Hmm  .  
and someone comes who enters after you  ,  
Hmm  .  
who might have  ,   well  ,   a grade  ,   higher  ,   more education than you  ,   nevertheless  ,   doesn't know how to do the job like you because you've been there for many years  .  
Exactly  ,   Aha  ,   you already have the experience  ,   you've spent more time there  .    But  ,   this guy who came in new  ,   only because he has a bigger title  ,   they will give him a higher position than you  ,   they will go above you  ,   you know  ?  
Hmm  .   Yeah  ,   yeah  ,   yeah  .  
For me  ,   you know  ?    I'm I'm a voter  .  
And  ,   at the beginning I didn't vote because  ,   but I realized that Hispanics need to count  .    You know  ?    It doesn't matter where we're from  ,  
yes  ,   of course  ,   sure  .    Sure  .  
Exactly  ,   you have to contribute  ,   some grain you will contribute  .  
And  ,   if we don't get into the politics  ,   they will never listen to us  .   Understand  ?  
No  ,   of course  ,   that  ,   that is  ,   that is super clear  .   yes  ,   no  ,   in Spain I  ,   I in
Okay  ,   in Spain I  ,   have always voted  ,   I think  ,   I  ,   since  ,   well  ,   since I was able to vote at eighteen years old  .  
Aha  .  
Aha  ,  
I think that never  ,   I've never  ,   I've never abstained  .  
Okay  ,   Okay  .  
Mm  ,   mm
Understand  ?   Then  ,   later already  ,   when I arrived here to the United States  ,   well  ,   as soon as I got here  ,   I register to vote fast  .  
Sure  .   And now you can  ,   sure  .  
We are the biggest power  ,   now  ,   in all this nation  .  
Because  ,   here  ,   without the Hispanic for the jobs  ,  
Hmm  ,   hmm  .  
they're not left with anyone  ,   you know  ?  
Yeah  ,   yeah  .    And do you think that  ,   that the Republicans better defend the interests of the Hispanics than the democrats  ?  
It depends on who has power  ,   it depend on what roots they have  .    You know  ?  
Sure  ,   aha  ,   aha  .  
Because  ,   believe me  ,   all  ,   the people  ,   don't support Bush  .    But I think that Bush has given  ,   Bush and Clinton  ,  
for me  ,   they've been two  ,   and the other  ,   Reagan  ,  
Aha  .  
Yes  ,   and they're from different parties  ,   sure  .  
Hmm  .    Sure  .  
In the Bush family there are Hispanic people  .  
Well  ,   yes  ,   I think it's  ,   it's the brother in law or the sister in law are from Mexico  ,   or something like that
yes  .    yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
Mhm  ,   aha
And  ,   there were a lot of Hispanic working  ,   in good positions  ,   you know what I mean  ?  
Mhm  ,   mhm
Executive secretaries  ,   office secretaries  ,   there were many people
yes   ,  yes  .   There are  ,   now there are a lot of Hispanic in the responsibility places of the government  ,   yes
That's why I tell you  ,   because he  ,   he has mixed with the Hispanic people  .   You know what I mean  ?   There are other leaders who have not given any chances  ,   not to black people
I see
nor the Hispanic
The blacks  ,   that sound funny
yes  ,   yes  .  
yes  ,   the colorted people
yes  ,   the Afric   ,   Afr   ,   how do they call them  ?   mm
Afro American
Afro american  ,   right
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
Wel  ,   now  ,   the  ,   now the Afro American have  ,   have had more chances than they had before
Right  .   Look at Collin Powell  ,   all what he has done
And they have been  ,   aha  ,   it has only been  ,   I think  ,   it has all been with these three leaders
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   Well  ,   it has been some years  ,   if you add  ,   if you add all the mandates of these leadres  ,   it has been some years
Because  ,   Reagan was eight  ,   right  ?  
Aha  ,   aha
And then there was Clinton  ,   eight also  ,   that makes sixteen  .   And this one will soon make eight also  .   So  ,   it is twenty some years
And  ,   why do you think they didn't change Bush  ?   Why do you think that even the democrats voted for Bush  ?  
well  ,   I don't know  ,   really I don't know  ,   because I have been in this country for one year  ,   and I don't have no idea
Because of the war
But  ,   I think that  ,   I think that
It was only because of the war  .   Otherwise they have thrown him
N   ,   eh  ?  
That I think that because of the war they shouldn't have re elected him  .   The problem is
You know what I mean  ?   If they had put another person
I see  ,   I see  ,   already
let's suppose that things turn out wrong  ,   who will be responsible for it  ?  
Mh
To this new person who entered  .  
Sure  .  
You know  ?    He has to finish what he started  .  
Because  ,   if you notice how  ,   how he was going to win  ,   if the majority voted  ,   the other times it was  ,   you know  ?    It was the republican  ,   and he didn't win  .  
Yeah  .    Or  ,   what we have to see is if he finishes it or doesn't finish it  .  
Yeah  .    Yeah  ,   yeah  .    But  ,   these things  ,  
Aha  .  
Like  ,   even if  ,   they don't want to show up  .    Even if people wanted to vote for him  ,   I don't k 
No  .  
Twenty eight years in power  .  
No  ,   no  .    Here in the States  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  .    Here in the United States  ,   no  .    In the United States you can't have more than two terms  .    Like  ,   Clinton couldn't run anymore  ,   and Reagan couldn't run anymore  .  
Maybe I think that they can come back  ,   because they can come back  ,   I think that  ,   how do you say  ?    to
what can happen is that another party's candidate would advertise
okay
bush can not be more in power and has to go  ,   so now another republican candidate can cover  .  
now we have Bush Jr  .   in office but he can no longer be there  .   you know  ?  
I think as soon as his term finishes there would be another candidate
Mm  .  
the iraqis must have the power  ,   and they can do whatever They want do
yes  ,   that´s right  .  
I will throw a bomb there too  ,   and it would be over  .   I would do as in Hiroshima  .   because these people are bad  .  
no is that they are by their own belief  .   Understand  ?  
No  ,   but this  ,   this  ,   this town  ,   I think that they are all fanatics  .   Because  ,   if you look there  ,   and you don't see a woman in the street  .   When they show them  ,   you don't see a single woman in the street  .  
Because  ,   there  ,   the woman is not worth anything  .  
Well  ,   in all in all the Hispanic areas  ,   there's sexism anywhere  .  
Sure  ,   there's also a lot of sexism in the Hispanic world  .  
You know  ?  
Hello
Hello
yes my name is Annie and I'm calling from Miami
How are you  ?  
fine And your name  ?  
Ah  ,   Junior  ,   Junior
Jay Johnny
Junior
Junior
yes
ah  ,   pardon
okay
And where are you calling from  ?  
From New York
Ah  ,   how nice
And what is your name  ?  
My name is Annie
aha A pleasure
A pleasure too
How old are you  ?  
Eh  ,   eh  ,   thirty six
I am twenty two
wow Are you a student  ?  
No  .   I finished school
Ah how good
And you  ?  
Eh  ,   I am here at home with my daughter waiting for another one
Waiting what
waiting another baby  ,   too
so another one  ,   and how old is your daughter  ?  
yes eh  ,   twenty two months
Oh  ,   I have I have a two years old one  .  
oh  ,   what is her name  ?  
ah  ,  
oh
and yours
her name is Sara Rebeca Thanks
What is your nationality  ?  
eh  ,   I was born in Puerto Rico but  ,   eh we moved here to Miami when I was five
aha
my parents are Dominicans  ,   but the lady that raise me was Puerto Rican so I'm like a mix of both
um
so when they ask me I never know exactly how
You were born where  ?   Oh  ,   you're Puerto Rican
yes
Dominican Puerto Rican and and both
yes and and you  ?  
aha Puerto Rican
ah how nice
What part in Puerto Rico  ?   you don't remember
ah
What part in Puerto Rico  ?  
eh  ,   in Levitton it was where we lived for many years well until I was five
oh
And you  ?  
I'm from Yaguco on my dad's side and from Cabrojo on my mom's side
aha
But I've never gone there
Oh yes
yes
wow
never  ,   and have you returned there  ?  
yes no  ,   it's been like let me see probably like six years that I don't go  ,   but before that I went every summer  ,   I would spend the summers in Santo Domingo
No
Then eh from there we always would go to Puerto Rico and from Puerto Rico you know we would return
And are you married  ?  
yes yes  ,   from
With a Puerto Rican or Dominican  ?  
no  ,   with an American
or American  .  
yes
he's in the Army the  ,  
ah
he's in the Army
No  ,   no he is  ,   he works with the department of justice
Oh
so  ,   but
doing what  ?  
he  ,   he eh is guard of prisoners
Oh of counselor  ,   okay no because almost all the women that talk in the survey are married with an American today are in the service  .   No I  ,   I also work in the police too
Oh yes
Yeah  ,   with NYPD
wow
yeah
and how's that  ,   that must be a tough job
uh  ,   it's good  ,   and it's fun if you do it when you're young
right
Because doing  ,   like that  ,   young  ,   since I'm more than twenty two  ,   i work in the street  ,   regular clothes and all that
right
as a covert agent and that
Right
and i like it more than when i first started last year as a rookie  ,   i was dressed in uniform but i have more fun now
and  ,   your work schedule  ,   ¿is it good or is it a little tough  ?  
it depends  ,   because as a covert it can change
Right
one week i might be here in an area  ,   doing a  ,   an hour  ,   a different schedule  ,   like that  ,   it depends  .   I wanted to do that  ,   uh  ,   correctional
Uh huh
what you do  ,   your husband  ,   i don't know  ,   i wanted to be that  ,   but
Uh huh
i liked being on the streets better
Yes he  ,   he's not exactly a correctional officer her is more for recreation
yeah  .  
he is  ,   he  ,   he
right  .  
that's what he likes to do  ,   the recreation but he's working with the department of
I don't understand the word in Spanish  .  
recreation
Oh right  .  
um then he  ,   he you know  ,   he is not necessarily a guard but rather he he is the one that deals  ,   with keeping the prisoners occupied
Yeah
so that they don't have you know
fights and that  ,   yeah
time to do any other thing
yes I wanted  ,   I was interested in doing that
aha
but then like  ,   I have many friends in that  .  
aha
talking with them they say is good  ,   because you are inside there always in the jail and that but the only thing is that after a while you feel as if you are also imprisoned
well
because you are locked up also there with them inside there  ,  
well that
the only thing different is that you can home at night  .  
yes  ,   the good thing about him is that he's not inside one of those childish dormitories  ,   he is outside his is the one that  ,   gives them the basketballs
yeah  ,  
you know the music  ,   whatever  ,   so he is not you know in the dormitories
and he has a revolver there when he's working or when he goes out  .  
no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   nor when he goes out neither  .  
Oh  ,   he doesn't have a revolver  ,   when he goes out  .  
no  ,   with the department of justice
yes
or federal bureau of prisons
yes
they don't give them a revolver when they are inside because they think
Okay no  ,   here neither but when they leave work  .  
neither  ,   that's the only department that doesn't give them eh  ,   a revolver
here  ,   here there are a few that have  .  
look
unless it is since we are in New York
aha
that  ,   because  ,   according to them the only reason they give them the revolver is because if someone who has been imprisoned sees you in the street that recognizes you he can hurt you
wow
That's why here they give the guns to the correction officers
no he  ,   he has he  ,   he can carry it if he wants  ,   well not if he wants  ,   is that
yes
the institution where he works hasn't given it to him
oh
and many of the people at  ,   at work want the guns  ,   but he doesn't want it because he doesn't want to be you know  ,   carrying a gun all the time
yes
especially since we have  ,   you know a small girl but  ,   that is something that the people where he works at are trying to you know  ,   to  ,   to request
but he  ,   every year he has to go to what do they call it to what is it called  ,   I even forgot the English
eh  ,  
a shutting man
yeah  ,   yeah  ,   then he has to not only do it to let's say  ,   to where he works but he also has eh  ,   a a
ah  ,   ah  ,   ah  ,   I'm forgetting the words he has a special training
yes
that to be able eh  ,   to take the prisoners  ,   let's say from the jail to the hospital  .  
Oh transport
right then that's why he also has to do the shooting
shooting yes well here all the correctional officers they simply give it to them  ,   because you know that in a correctional facility that they do something  ,   happens inside they give them that  .  
yes
sometimes  ,   when they go out to the street  ,   you know what they say  ,   the world is a small place  .   And they can run into them  ,   many times we have have heard on the police radios
that there are correctional officers that are hitting them on the street
wow
And the police has to go to help them
wow
they cal a ten thirteen or correctional officer getting [hit] and they say the code they're giving about it
Well  ,   thank god here where he's working  ,   there are prisoners  ,   but not violent  ,   and he says the reason for that is that many of the people who go to prison here in Miami
yes
don't want to leave Miami
yeah
so many times they behave  ,   because you know  ,   if they don't  ,   they send them to other places  ,   let's say New York  ,   Oregon  ,   whatever
yes  ,   it's like every month  ,   like  ,   you can't judge the person because there are lots of people that have gone to prison but it's for things
yes
that they didn't do
yes
or things that you know you make mistakes  ,   that it's a mistake  ,   but it's something illegal
Right
Because look  ,   just because they fought  ,   and it's not them
Right
but they have to take both people to hear both sides od the story  ,   and you're harming the record of a person no matter how innocent it is  ,   they didn't do it  ,   but you have to arrest them both
for the simple reason is that right now if I go out with five guys in the street and I fall above a man it's good  ,   you will say there were three of these guys are abusers  ,   I gave it to this man
but  ,   they will arrest me  ,   they won't arrest him  ,   when they ask me  ,   why did you fall on this man  ?    Oh  ,   because he abused someone who I used to see  .  
yes
and they have to find out because you said this  .  
yes
Because this happened here  ,   there was a man who fell on  ,   the let the man go  ,   and the boys were trying  ,   you know how the police were  ,   oh  ,   shut up you clowns  ,   right
hmm
and because he went  ,   because the man had seen a robbery in the area  ,   and the boys saw him and they sent him to check it out
wow
and they let the man go  ,   but after ten  ,   fifteen minutes they caught the man  .    They jumped on the guys because  ,   it's like I say  ,   many people will prey  .  
yeah
so it makes it a bit difficult but at least he has a job  .  
well it's like my  ,   and you don't work  ?  
no  ,   I stay here at home with the kid
oh  ,   you see  ,   the mom of my daughter works too  ,   she's a supervisor in a clinic
aha
well she works five  ,   no  ,   five days a week  ,   right a week  ,   then the other week she works seven days  .  
wow
and I work five days
Well this is why I was asking you about the schedule  ,   because his schedule isn't  ,   you know  ,   it's not difficult  ,   but right now he's coming home and we still haven't eaten dinner  .  
hmm and this isn't bad  ,   because at least he's not working from ten to six
yeah
you know
no  ,   like you say  ,   today I don't work  ,   or tomorrow
aha
Sunday  ,   Monday I work  ,   but next week I have to work Friday and Saturday and Sunday because it's for the clubs  ,   the night clubs
aha
I have to go to the night clubs to dance and something like that
That  ,   not  ,   yes  ,   I think that the two parties are okay  ,   but I sometimes think that we could have more than two parties
Because there are lots of different things that those two parties don't touch upon and the problem with that is that the country could become even more divided
So  ,   to have more parties you need to have a government style that is more  ,   like  ,   what do I know  ,   more like  ,   what's the name  ,   the ones that those countries have
that all the parties get together and instead of being elected  ,   they form a majority and and they try to achieve a common platform
between two or three different parties so that they are stronger  ,   like in the Parliament  .   The two parties are different  ,   they are not the same  .   That's the way I see it
Or in the mornings  ,   sure  ,   the broadcasters would loose money  ,   maybe  ,   but maybe if they all get a certain amount of money  ,  
that is the same from both parties  ,   then they wouldn't have to buy or sell them to the politicians  ,   through people or companies that have lots of money
so that they are sure that they will be politically benefited  .   I think that's the way it should be  ,   but oh  ,   oh
we are in it now  ,   in it now  ,   no  ?   It's been hard to pass laws that change the campaign rules  .   It's
Mm  ,   I think I am not very aware about what is going on  ,   about Mexican politics  ,   but it seems to me that maybe what's going on there
And some other countries  .   Where there is a party with all that strength  ,   mm  ,   they do whatever they want  ,   and if you don't do what they want then
Because we are very divided  ,   very divided  .   And all the power is held by one party now  .   This party has the  ,   eh  ,   judges  ,   the Congress  ,   the Presidency
all the power  .   But  ,   once you have three or four  ,   why not five  ,   why not ten  ,   why not twenty  ?   So this is a balance
Excuse me  ,   you  ,   you  ,   where are you from  ?  
I am Argentinean
And how is it in Argentina  ?  
In Argentina  ,   there are several parties  .   But there are several parties which are all of the 'Peronistas'  .   They have different names but they are all 'Peronistas'  ,   and then there is the Radical Party
And then there are other parties  ,   but they are all very small ones  .   But  ,   since Peron  ,   the party who holds the power is the 'Peronist' country  ,   or whatever name it has
go on strikes  ,   they block them somehow  ,   so they can't go on  ,   and finally the president has to resign  ,   and have new elections
yes  .   Like we say  ,   'back the donkey to the wheat'
mhm
Now  ,   the present President  ,   he is of a Peronist party  .   But  ,   mm  ,   it seems to me that he is doing good things
follow his policy  ,   yes  .    This is what it seems to me  .    And where are you from  ?  
hmm
No  ,   no  ,   the truth is that I know less than a little  ,   but  ,   how are the parties there  ?  
Well  ,   it's  ,   during many years it was actually governed by only one party  .    The "Pri" party
Hmm
In fact Fox  ,   is the first President who doesn't belong to the party in power
Oh
Eh  ,   he's from the "Pan" and the "Pri  .  "  The Institutional Revolutionary party has been the one that governed during all those years  .   A little
in  ,   in Argentina  ,   with the Peronista  ,   no  ?  
yes  ,   hmm
This  ,   yes  ,   Fox  ,   eh  ,   has also been putting many blocks on a legislative level  ,   the Deputies  .    At the time that this passed the proposals in exchange  .  
That is always a means of balance  .   Balance when  ,   when there are two or eh or very established powers like it is here Right  ?  
yes  .  
The same happens that in the Legislative Chamber well that just Right  ?   All the proposals of the President are not voted and  ,   it endela  ?   a little there  .  
Well the actions of one party  ,   Right  ?   But is true that in Mexico there are many parties  .   but well  ,   is eh The Government
gives them money for their campaigns  ,   and is a dumping of money in reality  .   Almost  ,   almost that there what  ,   you know that each Presidential campaign  ,   the parties are formed
Ah  ,   to get the money of
To get the money and yes  ,   they didn't get enough votes to continue  ,   for the following period  ,   simply well the following the following round they change the name
and form another party again
Ah  .  
There there's a terrible corruption  ,   Right  ?  
mm
But  ,   but well the three important parties that have always been competing so to speak are  ,   The Revolutionary Party  ,    PRD
mm
Party of the Democratic Revolution  ,   that now has an important candidate  ,   in which the Mexicans are putting their hopes on  .   And it would be a very different proposal
yes  .  
And well so  ,   being in a city of twenty six million people
Is like a country  .  
Is like a country  .   And since he's really done important things  .   He's very at the head of all the
eh these opinion polls  ,   Right  ?  
yes  .  
the
Because it turns out that my parents are six months here and six months there  .   Then when they are here I have to eh  ,   I put in
have been here  ,   since seventy four  .   I'm fifty years old  .  
aha  ,   And are you working here  ?  
Eh  ,   yes  ,   since the  ,   since I was nine years old that  ,   that I live in the United States  .  
Ah  ,   wow  .   no  ,   well all your life then  ,  
However in the Spanish  CNN
mm
one finds out about other countries  ,   and find out much more of Mexico of course because is here next to us and of other things  ,   then sometimes when I hear 
hear news from Mexico I don't understand too well what is happening  ,   but now what you explained to me will help me  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes of course  ,   yes it helps  .   And really  ,   this Lopez Obrador calls a lot  ,   a lot of people  ,   he's been helping  .   People of scarce resources  .  
well that has mean  ,   almost  ,   almost the difference between life and death for these people  .   Right  ?  
Hi  ,   What's your name  ?  
Mayra  ,   Who am I talking to  ?  
eh Pilar
Pilar  ,   Where are you  ?  
What  ?  
Where are you  ?  
In New York  ,   And you  ?  
ah OK  ,   it's Philadelphia  ,   you're close by mhm
Philadelphia mh  ,   And what do you think about  ,   about politics  ?  
I don't know about politics it seems to me that it's very different here in the United States of here in Mexico but for what I've been
I don't know seeing people and all I don't like it here  ,   that you must be by force on one side you have to be either Republican or Democrat
yes you think
and people yes  ,   I think  ,   well it seems that they're too extremist in their decisions they make like that I mean always they're either Democrats or Republicans and that's it
like that conservatives or liberals and that's it
yeah well there are more parties but they have very little
yes  ,   yes
it seems that they have very little right
yes  ,   that's the bad thing And what do you think  ?   What's your opinion  ?   of the
well I'm the same  ,   I come from Spain and I don't know much about politics here and I don't I mean I'm not very informed  ,   but I don't like it for whatever little I know I don't like the government they have right now
mhm
the United States
mhm
And I don't know if the other party was going to be better  ,   it seems to me that they are kind of the same
I believe they are pretty similar regarding economy and economic issues
yes  ,   there are not lots
I mean  ,   they have to be similar  ,   I mean  ,   there's no other way
yes  ,   it's just that women's rights and
yes  ,   I believe so  ,   I think that's where the main difference is
yes but
I think one is pretty conservative and then they decide all this and the other  is more liberal and about acknowledging ore rights  ,   decisions
and the other one is a bit conservative  ,   the other one is just a bit conservative  .  
mhm  ,   that's the bad thing  ,   I mean  ,   it's just  ,   or at least to me  ,   t he people I've spoken to  ,   we are worried as everything is becoming so conservative  .  
and they are electing key persons for the government that are so conservative and with a similar ideology for the government
mm
but they won't last that long  ,   this is going to last until Bush leaves because for example  ,   well
that are to be used in the United States  ,   I don't think it will change in a long time  ,   I don't know if that's a good thing  ,   to me  ,   it's a backward step too
that they are doing that
yes  ,   yes  ,   don't you think that people here doesn't vote  ,   oh  ,   by a party  ?   They vote as a tradition or for the specific candidate that wants to be President
I don't know  ,   it's about the parties spending  ,   they spend so much money in the campaigns because people  ,   that's what they vote for  .  
yes  ,   yes that seems a lot like them  ,   well is what I saw many people didn't even know what it was what it was they were offering or proposing and all but rather it was like
proposing yes
this one is Christian  ,   we are all Christians  ,   that's good
hm
and already I mean it seemed  ,   so I don't know how good the arguments they both presented in the campaigns were
yes  ,   yes
I mean it surprised me a lot the result of the vote I never thought it would've turned out like that but I don't know
well here by the east coast the people didn't
yes  ,   no
didn't  ,   didn't believe what came out in the result  ,   no is that it can't be
yes  ,   no well I think that around the world  ,   no I imagine in  ,   in other countries  ,   what they must've thought  ,   someone told me for example in Japan
when they found out they came out with a video in the news that everybody was laughing they thought that it was funny that they seriously voted for him
incredible it was like that so ridiculous  ,   so absurd that they just laughed
for me I felt I like crying  ,   I felt like
I got very mad
I felt like crying more than laughing
yes no yes I got very mad but I think that they were seeing like that how absurd everything could be
yes
yes  ,   yes it really surprises me sometimes that such things happen
yes but is that the government  ,   doesn't have a good strategy unfortunately  ,   they know how to say what to say to convince the majority in this country the people that don't have much
much education or many ideas  ,   so that they believe everything they say
well yes  ,   hmm
and they get their votes and then they do what they want because they don't do what they say either  ,   they do what they feel like and a little more
hmm
it's really sad  ,   truly  ,   but well  ,   in this country it's like this but not as extreme  ,   but
it's not the same  ,   I'm from Mexico  ,   for example and this  ,   really is a campaign that only
but there's a little
tries to sell an imagine or do what they can and yeah  ,   and after
yes and then when you come to power and do what you want  ,   no
hmm
yes it's the same in Spain it's the same in Spain there are two parties to  ,   well  ,   I think it's like this everywhere  ,   those who are the most powerful
yes
and when one of them is in power  ,   the other  ,   the opposition dedicates themselves to criticizing everything the other parties does  ,   the same  ,   it's all bad
yes hmm
and when it's their turn it's the other party who criticizes  ,   everything is bad and then the dedicate those in the government try to change and undo everything that the others have done  ,   they undo it
yes  ,   to undoing it and then they start again  ,   yes
yes  ,   and the country doesn't progress much
hmm and what are the two  ,   what are they two parties called
eh  ,   they're called the popular party which is the more conservative
hmm
the workers socialist Spanish party is the most liberal one but the other too are kind of liberal too
okay  ,   okay
oh  ,   the truth is  ,   they are kind of in the center but the problem is that  ,   or at least it seems like the socialist party just wants to vote against everything  .  
yes
yes  ,   well the popular party has now lost the last elections because of the bombings in Madrid  ,   do you remember  ?   I don't know if you know about it but do you remember that there were some terrorist attacks in Madrid last year  ?  
mm  ,   in Mexico  ,   in Mexico is also like that  ,   I'm from there and we have two or three
in March
parties that are quite similar
mhm
but the they are not divided in conservatives or liberal because nobody is really that liberal anyway
I see
I mean  ,   I don't know everything about women rights but they are not even discussed in Mexico  ,   so  ,   I believe that the only difference is that
yes
I don't know  ,   they said that their first priority was  ,   I don't know
mhm
the economy really but they are all so similar  ,   I think that the only reason why they voted for the other party is because we were tired of the old one  .  
and people wanted a change
yes
so  ,   they voted but it was for the worse and now they don't know what to do because you have to go back to what it used to be or stay with the one that never did anything
yes that's right  ,   that same thing happened in Madrid
yes
The socialist party was in the government for twelve years  ,   and at the end they voted for the other party because they were doing it bad and people was tired of them  ,   and changed  ,   right  ?  
mhm
the other party stayed for eight years but had also his problems and there was another change  ,   but  ,   none of them are good  ,   people don't like any of them
well  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   I think that's how we are here too
there comes a point when you realize that both of them are equally bad  ,   that all the politicians lie a lot  ,   that everything
you never  ,   you can never trust what they say  ,   it's sad  .   it's quite sad
mhm
it's very sad after all
yes  ,   yes  ,   that's what I have seen  ,   not long ago there were elections and I was not here  ,   I mean  ,   I arrived the next day and I didn't even notice  ,   so
people has so little interest that nobody  ,   not mu family nor my friends  ,   told em there was going to be an election
mhm  ,   but they voted  ,   didn't they  ?  
in the city  ,   yes  ,   no  ,   in Mexico in general  ,   I think they vote quite a lot  ,   I mean  ,   the rate is much higher than here in the United States  ,   I think so  ,   I'm not sure
but this time it was surprisingly low  ,   yes  ,   nobody was interested
people  ,   you see  ,   don't know who to vote for
yes  ,   yes  ,   there is nobody worth voting for
I think so  ,   I don't know if I'm right but I think that young people is not as interested in politics as they were before  ,   I mean
our parents' generation
mhm
politics was very important then  ,   the age of the revolutions and
well yes I think so  ,   is that
and now however the young people don't care
mm now that yes is not time of money or of working in banks and all the rest I think
yes the people don't have any reason to get into politics  ,   right
mm  ,   yes that I don't know either  .   And what do you do  ?  
WHat  ?  
What do you do
study  ,   I'm studying  ,   And you  ?  
okay also the same  ,   I'm in the third year of the university now
mm And what are you studying
I study chemical engineering
ah really me  ,   me electrical
yes really ah seriously  ,   okay
yes
and the ones that live there in the university of New York some did vote because many of my friends didn't vote here either
no is that me my friends here are all Spaniards
ah okay
then no  ,   no we can't vote but well yes I knew an American that was in my class and we did a project together and he did vote and also eh
he got very mad  ,   he was from California although he lived here
mm
I get very angry at the world the result
yes of course  .  
there is nothing that can be changed
there is nothing that can be changed
mhm
It is very difficult to change a law that has been imposed
It is very difficult to change a law that has been imposed
many states have changed very much
they removed the theory of evolution of the primary books
really
they removed the theory of evolution of the primary books
it is true I have also read that and I can not  believe it
I don´t know how anyone can do that
they removed the theory of evolution and say that God created everything
they are teaching in the place of evolution
the government agrees with the parties
mhm
the truth is that it is incredible
yes  ,   no and no one has said anything  .  
they have complained many times
yes  ,   I never heard a big racket about that  ,   I would've  ,   well I don't know I wouldn't let my kid go to a school like that
no  ,   no  ,   certainly  ,   the truth  ,   it's about I think the strategy here of the United States Is not
I have no idea
Hello  ,   this is Mercedes  ,   hello  ,   yes
hello  ,   i don't  ,   ¿how are you  ?    ,   hello  ,   fine  ,   ¿how are you  ?    ,   oh  ,   well  ,   and  ,   ¿what's your name  ?  
Fine  ,   uh  ,   Mercedes  ,   yes
It's mercedes  ,   oh  ,   and my [name] is
Nice to meet you  ,   well  ,   we have to talk about politics
Yeah  ,   and i don't know much about politics because people is very uh  ,   there's a lot of corruption  ,   so i don't like politics a lot  ,   and you  ?  
uh  ,   oh
I don't know much about
Oh  ,   no  ,   well  ,   not much either  ,   but still a bit  ,   more or less  ,   and  ,   ¿can you vote here in the United States  ?  
oh  ,   ¿where do you live  ?  
Uh  ,   in Philadelphia
Oh  ,   and i [live] in New York  ,   yeah
And  ,   ¿can you vote in New York  ,   have you ever voted  ?  
yeah  ,   they're coming in November
Ok  ,   right
You know  ,   so i don't know  ,   i don't know
And what  ,   ¿and what did you think about the last candidate you voted for  ?  
i don't know
The candidate for which you voted in November
I'm not  ,   i don't know  ,   maybe  ,   maybe yeah  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   i don't know  ,   and you  ?  
okay  ,   ah well  ,   I can't vote here in the United States
oh
no  ,   eh  ,   because I'm not a citizen
oh  ,   and my husband too
hmm  ,   hmm  ,   okay
so it's a problem for  ,   you know  ,   but I don't like the people you know
aha
so I don't know  ,   you have a husband  ?  
yes
and girl or boy  ,   daughter  ,   son  ,   yes  ,   how old are you  ?  
ah  ,   thirty
ohh and I'm forty eight
aha okay
oh you  ,   you're very young  ,   I have a daughter and she's thirty  ,   you know
yes okay  ,   and what do you think  ,   for example  ,   that there are only two dominant parties
that
what do you think that there are two dominant parties
ah I don't know
do you agree yes or no
maybe yes you know  ,   and you
okay ah  ,   not completely because if they dominate the majority of the votes
mm
then eh  ,   if they dominate too much and perhaps there's no opportunity for candidates who perhaps have more qualifications
aha  ,   mm
but that belong to parties eh that are no as popular to get ahead
oh  ,   oh you  ,   you work
yes
oh  ,   okay
and what do you also think for example of mm eh you mentioned the corruption before
yes a lot of corruption and
aha  ,   what have you lived  ,   the area where you live any experience with the corruption for example  ,   mm
yes an example there's mm I don't know I don't know you know it has a lot of corruption but I don't know what type or where you know
mm
no but  ,   but you know I know there's a lot of corruption
ah okay but what type of situation has seemed corrupt to you to say that there's too much corruption
ah  ,   let me see  ,   mm maybe  ,   maybe you know  ,   president Bush  ,   ah I is mm I don't know you think
no since  ,   ah okay  ,   aha yes yes  ,   yes well and that's the type of problem that having two dominant parties cause that ah when someone arrives to power they abuse the situation
yeah do you have identification to vote  ,   where are you from  .  
no I'm originally from Honduras  ,   Honduras  ,   yes
ah where  ,   oh Honduras  ,   oh and me here in ah  ,   in ah in the United States but my mom she's black
hmm  ,   hmm
and dad comes from Puerto Rico so you know I don´t know too much about Honduras but you know it has many problems there right Are there many problems in Honduras  ?  
hmm  ,   yes with politics right
well yeah
eh right now this year is the election year
aha yeah
and and we also have the problem of four political parties
aha
but only two parties are the most prevalent then eh  ,   there are people that  ,   the people who usually are the candidates are people with a lot of money and they abuse of their power  ,   hmm  ,   yes
oh  ,   oh  ,   no and how many years have ah you lived here in the
ah  ,   I have been here around seven years
oh seven do you like eh United States  ,   do you like it
yes that is fine  ,   yes  I hope eventually to become a citizen and could vote
aha
that is true  ,   and maybe to make a change to what politics is
yeah yes
hmm  ,   one more to participate in the United States politics
yes  ,   yes do you have ah children
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   one  ,   hmm  ,   a boy  ,   hmm
how many  ,   one  ,   a boy oh and how old is he
six months  ,   thanks  ,   yes  ,   yes
oh my goodness congratulations that is nice the first one how good
hmm  ,   yes ah yes also yes yes
yes you are very tired and you also work wow oh man you know it is very late now
yest it is nine o´clock time to sleep yes
and how many  ,   how many calls do you have now or today  ,   I have eleven calls
ah oh no eh just one  ,  
nothing more than that  ,   one  ,   oh and and and all the days you have  ,   do you want to talk to people right  ,   ah  ,   you have only one
yes  ,   yes yes
oh boy I have eleven  ,   eleven and yes
yes  ,   well eh continuing with the political issue and what do you think about the political system division in the United States with the Senate  ,   the congress and
mja  ,   mja
the president  ,   do you think he is intelligent  ,   logical or not  ,   do you agree
well we have you know Bloomberg you know the Bloomberg  ,   oh he is very rich but he does not have
hmm oh yes yes yes
much population but I don´t know maybe
hmm
he is not very rich so he is important no problem
hmm
but we have Cedan you know Fernando Cedan
no
yes  ,   he's Hispanic  ,   and he comes from Puerto Rico so  ,   but you know  ,   he doesn't have a lot of money so it's not good for him
ahhh yes I was reading an article that said that Bloomberg doesn't get a salary
no  ,   no  ,   no  ,   yes  ,   he's really rich  ,   really rich
that he works for a dollar his salary  ,   aha  ,   that his salary is a dollar  ,   hmm  .  
so yeah  ,   only because he's really rich
hmm
many people say this because he  ,   he doesn't work for more than a dollar
for a  ,   but yes it's true  ,   he only works for a dollar
yeah yes
and ehh  ,   he's satisfied with the work that he does
yeah true
he's satisfied with the work that he does  ,   yes or no
ahh may be yes  ,   may be no  ,   I don't know  ,   I don't know  ,   I don't know him much
is he better than Giuliani  ?  
ah  ,   Giuliani really really good too  ,   I don't know  ,   you know  ,   but he has  ,   Giuliani has a lot of corruption too
ahh
but you know  ,   everyone likes Giuliani  ,   you know  ,   yeah  ,   and you  ,   ahhh  ,   what's he called  ,   your mayor
ahh  ,   yes  ,   the  ,   hmm  ,   we
Hello  .   Hello  .  
yes  ?  
Ah  ,   I couldn't hear you  .   my name is Zulma  ,   from Texas  .  
Ah  ,   I'm Manuel from Chicago ah  ,   we talked yesterday no
Ah we got again  ,   the same topic  .  
Yeah  .  
Okay  ,   It's going to be hard to have another conversation on the same thing  .  
yes  .  
Do you want to start  ?  
Mm I don't know what  .   I can't think of anything  .  
Mm yes  .  
Ah  .   I suppose that basically I can't think of anything because the same as yesterday  ,   ah  .  
yes  ,  
It's just that I didn't think it was the same  .  
yes  .   It was very hard understand what he was saying but I think that I'm understanding and it says that if the Democratic party and the Democrats are one pea in a pod  .  
did you notice when he was saying what we had to talk about  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   ah eh there are many things that you can't understand him  .  
I didn't understand that at the beginning  ,   yes  ,   many times you can't understand him to good  .   But I think that what he was saying is that if they are two
pods in a pod  .   I mean that if they are the same thing or they are different  .  
Yeah  .  
so  ,   what do you think about that  ?  
like I told you before  ,   I believe in many things
the same
I think they have many things towards the end only care about one sector of society
Mhm
in other words they should do more for society but they are like two giants in a pond
yeah
there are things that divide society  ,   for instance the right of homosexuals
yeah
the republicans say yes and the democrats say no
other thing is how the money is spend republicans believe that there should be less social programs
the government should not be taking care of  people´s expenses
yes
so they cut social programs for people  ,   who truly needs it  .  
In the USA they use too much money for that
yeah  ,   I have heard that a lot
what about democrats  ?  
Yes  ,   I saw that they are against that  ,   there are many people who truly needs it but there are also people who don´t even needs it  .  
Mm  .   mm
Mm  .   yes  .  
There are many people that  ,   that can work and don't want to  ,   or  ,   or there are many people that that lie so they give them that money  ,   when they shouldn't be collecting the money  .  
Yeah  .  
Exactly  .  
Mm  ,   Yeah  ,   Oh no  ,   I don't know what else to tell you  .  
Yeah  ,   yes  ,   I know  .  
yes  ,   yes  .   And you well that have never decided to vote  ,   how come you've never been interested in politics  ?   why  ?  
Well  ,   for the same as many others  .   That's very complicated and
sometimes you go and if you want to vote  ,   you vote and after you voted  ,   I don't know in a month  ,   two  ,   three months when they make the change in government and all
you realize that well in reality it wasn't what you were expecting  .  
I mean  ,   you get all your hopes up that now this will change  ,   this year will be different  ,   this president from this party will do this
and practically  yes they do for well for certain people only  .  
But at least one at least  ,   at least me eh I don't  ,   don't notice much that one's help makes much of a difference who wins  .  
Perhaps if they do it one notices it but that doesn't interest me much  .   That's why what I've been seeing like I was telling you already since
But do you keep informed of what's happening or not  ?  
Well yes  ,   sure  ,   yes  ,   I just keep out  ,   not very
Mm  ,   mm
yes  ,   yes I'm ah aware of all that's happening and all but up to there and nothing more  .  
yes  .   I think that it's important that the people  ,   I mean that the  ,   that that the people are active in  ,   the politics of the country where one lives  .  
Then is hard for one to be interested in the politics when  ,   when there are really no options or one feels that they are wasting their time
Alright  .  
Yeah  .  
that there's no  ,   it doesn't make a difference if the people go to vote or not  .  
And after there were problems like in the elections  ,   ah  ,   they ones before the past ones  .    Do you remember that there was this problem  ?  
Oh yes  .  
They didn't know  ,   they didn't know who had won the presidency  .  
and they had these problems in Florida and they didn't know if someone had tampered or not  .  
That it depended mostly on this state who won  ,   no  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   because the voting system in the United States is really strange  .  
Like  ,   people vote for the president but this doesn't count  .  
Like  ,   you go and vote and af  this number of people  ,   it doesn't count  .    Each state has a number of representatives  ,   who are those who go to vote  .  
Yeah  .  
yes  .  
So  ,   what happened in these elections  ,   Al Gore  ,   who was running for president  ,   won the vote of the people  .  
I mean  ,   most of the people voted for him  ,  
Yeah
but as what it really counts is the number of representatives  ,   the number of the representatives  ,   then Bush won because Florida voted for him  ,   so Bush won the elections
yes  .  
nobody wanted the other to have more power  ,   so  ,   the ones from the North didn't want the ones from the South to be more powerful than them
Yeah  .  
Well yeah but right now it's more like a tradition that has been around for years
yes  .  
Because of these types of problems  ,   some states should definitely not be penalized for others  ,   or against the others
Yeah  .  
well  ,   that's what they say  ,   they are united  ,   they are just one country and all of that but I think that nobody  ,   nobody wants to change it  .  
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
none
Good afternoon  .   Mildre from Connecticut  .  
Maira  ,   where are you from  ?  
From Philadelphia  .  
Mm  .   yes  ,   that's what I've noticed  ,   who knows why  ?   yes  ,   how are you  ?   Where are you from originally  ?  
Well  ,   the university  ,   I think  ,   that's over there  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   is here  ,   I'm in the university  ,   in fact  .  
Ah  ,   that's why  .   Ah  ,   that's why eh
Then  ,   they are the ones that are doing the project  ,   but here I haven't seen that much advertising  .   Then  ,   rather is people from the city  .  
Perhaps  ,   or Perhaps people from the city  ,   perhaps they've advertised in the city  .   Not in the university  .   I want to try  .  
So  ,   what do you think of politics  ?  
You are not a voter yet  ?  
What  ?  
Are you a voter or not  ?  
No  ,   no  ,   not yet  ,   hardly  ,   well in Mexico I could but not here  .  
You don't vote  .   Oh  ,   okay  .  
But but
Eh  ,   eh  ,   what the want to  ,   what they want to know is whether you think there are distinctions among parties  ,   mm  ,   let's say if there is an agreement
do you think that they reach such agreemnets even belonging to different parties  ?  
Mhm  .   What I have seen is that lately there are only liberal and re   ,   de  and regular  ,   I mean there isn't even a difference about economy
or  ,   between countries  ,   or trade or whatever it is they are doing  ,   but they are only stating on staying by the side of religion and
and being  ,   being conventional  ,   and the others want rights  .   And that's it  ,   that is all I am seeing lately  ,   and it looks to me that they are moving to both extremes  ,   for some reason
So  ,   it looks to me that politics here in the United States is becoming a battle between them both  ,   to see who makes everything a little more conventional and how
the liberals make it to defeat the current government and so on  ,   but I don't know  .  
It is always a  ,   a   ,   how you call it  ?   a little  ,   a little different  ,   well I think that now even the democrats themselves  are dividing
and what do you think  ?   Mm
They are  ,   they are somehow  ,   eh  ,   quitting  ,   you know
Mm  ,   they are just fighting  ,   I think
yes  ,   they are getting angry with themselves  ,   they are
Mhm
like they don't want other candidates and they don't help themselves  .   I think there are divisions in the country  ,   as long as there are two different parties
Sure
there will always be a division  ,   but that doesn't mean  ,   because in your country  ,   if you vote
Mhm
and don't vote  ,   eh  ,   do you vote for the candidate or for the party  ?  
Oh  ,   I don't know
Because  ,   because your beliefs are a part of  ,   of if your family comes from this party  ,   or you vote for
No  ,   I think that  .  
for your own belief  ?  
It's for the candidate generally  .    In Mexico  ,   I saw  ,   now they're doing it more for the candidate because he's given a party  ,   no  ?    they don't make any difference  .  
Like  ,   they don't give you any guarantee that they will do it better  .  
So  ,   I don't know  ,   but here for example  ,   I've seen how the parties have an idea  ,   no  ?    So the liberals generally follow  ,   like  ,   the democrats generally follow this  ,   eh  ,   this side
and the republicans follow the other  .    But what I don't understand is this  ,   if none of the two is very good  ,   who can't there be something in between  ?    like  ,   why does it have to forcibly be
liberals or republicans  ,   eh  ,   and everyone else who isn't necessarily in the extremes  .  
No  ,   just remember that they come from different ideas  ,   some are more conservative and others are more  ,   how would you say  ?   More liberal  ,   they're called  .  
Hmm  .  
You know  ?    The ideas of the republicans are a little more conservative
Hmm  .  
Well  ,   yes  .    But I don't know why they can't at least have  ,   one in the middle who's a little more neutral for people who aren't on one of the two extremes  .  
they can't they cant' go in because even the candidates need a certain amount of votes to get in  ,   they have primaries and see if
they get enough votes to enter the the the the race
Mhm  .  
it's quite hard  .  
yes  ,   they always fight  ,   no  ?   yes  ,   I think they do  ,   it's like if one of them is in power the other ones are against his proposals  .  
with that  ,   I don't know  ,   how is it  ?  
Even now  ,   anyway  ,   this government is putting up so many
They can't
conservatives  ,   no  ?   In all the posts they are choosing conservative people  ,   and that's what I was thinking  ,   the day when this  ,   when this
I mean  ,   when Bush leaves and a new President arrives  ,   well everything is going to be conservative  .  
I mean  ,   the judges in general  ,   they are still going to be  ,   I don't know if much is going to change because a new
Well  ,   it has to change  ,   there are so many things that the citizens don't like
No  ?  
All the  ,   they have to decide it when the next voting comes  ,   what's what they have to change and what doesn't  .   I vote because i think it's important that we  ,   specially the hispanic  ,   vote
Uh huh
And  ,   when i got here  ,   uh  ,   well  ,   in my country i participated in helping politicians  ,   but here i got a little more involved in politics
Oh  ,   ¿yes  ?  
To fight for our rights  ,   specially Hispanics in  ,   uh  ,   in Connecticut  ,   here where i live  ,   there are plenty  ,   white people control almost everything  ,   and they don't let the [  .    .    .  ] participate much
Uh huh
to do all those things in favor of our community
Right
To disclose our roots  ,   to let them be known everywhere  ,   yes  ,   i think it's important  ,   it's the same with the voting
If you don't vote  ,   you don't expose yourself  ,   and you have no right
Well  ,   that's it
¿Do you understand  ?    ,   so
And why don't  ,   ¿why is it that so many people don't vote here in the United States  ?  
¿What  ?  
Because i think about sixty percent of the people votes  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   they said
Uh  ,   but  ,   specially  ,   most of the elections here depends on hispanics  ,   but Hispanics have this mindset of "oh  ,   I'm not voting because
I'm not american"  ,   or "i'm not from
Mm  .  
this country  ,   I don't have to see  ,   the laws here don't interest me but if you are living here you have to be interested for what's here because
here is where you are voting  ,   you can't go to your country to vote  .   I don't think that there are many countries that give you the right to vote like that
Well  ,   yes  ,   I think so  .  
here in the United States you can be outside and can come to vote  .   You can vote by mail that they do  ,   and but there are other countries where that is not permitted  ,   you have to be present to vote  .  
But you need the nationality  ,   right  ?   to vote  .  
Here  ?  
Mm  .  
yes  ,   that's why  ,   then  ,   well maybe half the Hispanics still aren't  .  
Mm  .   Mm  .  
yes  .  
and  ,   and I saw that there are many  ,   many Hispanics in good jobs in the white house  .   Not all  ,   not all the the
governments give the Hispanics the opportunity  ,   but there are certain Hispa  I mean  ,   certain governors that do take the Hispanics into account  ,   for jobs because they know that besides they are bilingual that they help them
we have a  ,   the advantage that we speak two languages  ,   after we learn English
Hmm  .    Hmm  .  
Well yes  ,   but how nice that they're doing this  ,   because if we're all like this we need a little  ,   and what is the  ,   you don't know what they say  ,   then  ,   for example  ,   in California now  ?  
Because those who also voted for the governor were almost all Hispanic and they're doing worse with the reforms he made  ,   no  ?  
Eh  ,  
I say  ,   this is what I've heard  ,   I didn't pay much attention  ,   so the truth is that
Well  ,   I don't know  ,   I don't know  ,   how popular  ,   how much Hispanic population there in California  ,   even if I think it's pretty big  .  
yes  .  
the people who live there  ,   you know  ?    those who are really  ,   Californian
Hmm  .  
no  ,   they aren't Hispanic because the Hispanic at times  ,   it's well oriented  ,   doesn't know how to vote  ,   you know  ?    doesn't know who the candidate is
so  ,   sometimes  ,   like  ,   when they go to the polls  ,   because I worked helping  ,   you know  ,   to orient them  ,   they don't know where  ,   what they have to do
you sometimes have to go in with them to the machine to explain to them what they have to do  ,   how they can vote
eh  ,   I think that they should give a few more classes  ,   especially here in the United States so that they know more
Okay  .  
it's not the same in your language as here  ,   when you go  ,   well  ,   there it is  ,   it's all in English  ,   there aren't instructions in Spanish  ,   you know  ?  
Well  ,   yes  .    Hmm  .  
and if there's not a person also that helps in the lists we realized one year
Mm  .  
already when they returned it was already late for them to be able to vote  .  
Ah  ,   really  ?  
So  ,   some one hundred fifty more people stayed without being able to vote that day because they would tell them that
Wow  .  
Ah  ,   seriously  ?  
this is your name but  ,   or  ,   or your name doesn't appear here
Mm  .  
understand  ?   so  ,   no  ,   eh we deci 
Hello  ?  
Hello  ,   good evening  .  
Good evening  ,   with whom do I have the pleasure of speaking  ?  
With Norma  ,   from here  ,   Atlanta  ,   Georgia
Ah  ,   Norma  ,   I think we already spoke once  .  
Ah yes  ?  
My  ,   my name is Silvia  ,   I live in Philadelphia  .  
Ah  ,   OK  ,   yes yes  ,   aha  .  
yes it's true  ,   that we spoke  ,   that you were telling me
yes yes  ,  
that  ,   that you had met that  ,   that  ,   em  ,   you travelled with  ,   with religious activities  ,   and that you had met your husband  ,   and that you had stayed there  .  
Aha  ,   Aha I think you are from Venezuela  ,   no  .  
Ah  ,   from  ,   from  ,   yes well  ,   yes  .  
No and how are you  ,   what do you think about politics  ?  
Ah  ,   Nowadays nobody seems to know anything  ,   right  .   Look  ,   tell me about politics in Peru  .   I  ,   many years ago that I'm not up to date with what is happening in Peru  .  
Well
So I've lived here for about ten years  ,  
Aha  ,   aha  ,   aha
No  ,   and well  ,   I know that they changed the president  ,   and well that people now are suffering  ,   like before  ,   like always  .    Because there aren't jobs  ,   that
Like  ,   for  ,   for the government to come  ,   people are always bad  .  
Hmmm  ,   hmmm  .  
I think that are going to be more favorable to change  ,   many times  .  
Ah  ,   Fujimori  ,   and he  ,   a long time ago  ,   yeah  ,   he got out of there  ,   and now he's not  ,   he escaped to Japan
Ah  ,  
He took refuge in Japan because they denounced him  .  
Hmm  ,   I think yes  ,   the truth is I don't remember  ,   since I wasn't there
Ah  ,   aha  ,   aha
No  ,   and
And  ,   he went  ,   he fled to  ?  
No  ,   of course  ,   because they  ,   they had bought what was really a  ,   uh  ,   a corrupt policy  ,   so  ,   the thing is  ,   he stole money  ,   money from
Uh
Right  ?    ,   from the country  ,   something like that  ,   so  ,   uh
Yes
so  ,   uh  ,   they sued him  ,   they wanted to  ,   uh  ,   put him in jail
Right  ,   right
But well  ,   he fled  ,   he sought political refuge in Japan  ,   so
Oh
I believe he's been there up to this day
so the Japanese are protecting him
Yes
And  ,   and  ,   how did a Japanese man ever got to Peru  ?  
Well  ,   he's nor really Japanese  ,   he's Peruvian
Right  ,   but of Japanese descent
But he has  ,   i mean  ,   he's from Japanese descent  ,   his family is Japanese
Oh  ,   and
So  ,   now  ,   an i guess there must be some clause that  ,   since he's son of Japanese
Right  ,   right
so you can seek refuge in Japan
Yes  ,   maybe  ,   maybe
Oh  ,   so that's why he  ,   he fled to Japan  ,   sure  ,   right
they give him citizenship or something like that  ,   right  ,   and  ,   but  ,   ¿are there many immigrants from Japan to Peru  ?  
Yes  ,   more or less
Oh  ,   yes
Uh huh
That's funny  ,   and  ,   and
Yes  ,   there are lots of Asian people in Peru  ,   that have  ,   uh  ,   they're like very traders there  ,   they have their
Right
their place  ,   a very big place  ,   where they have their stores and they expor  they import things from Japan or China  ,   or
Uh um
From Asian countries  ,   and they have there
¿And what kind are there more of  ?    ,   or aren't there
Business
¿it's more or less a bit of anything  ,   without anyone being the principal  ?  
Well  ,   countries like that
From Asian countries  ,   there are some that dom 
Yeah  ,   there are lots of Chinese
Right
There are lots of Chinese in Peru
Uh huh  ,   uh huh
Chinese and Japanese also  ,   of course  .  
Aha
No  ,   and Koreans
Oh  ,   and is that something recent  ,   or a historic thing since a long time ago  ?  
Well I think that's been a long time  ,   right  ,   that they started to immigrate  .  
Aha  ,   aha
no  ,   is not  ,   is not recent  ,   it's been a long time  .  
Hm mm  ,   hm mm
yes  ,   because they already  ,   I mean their generations  ,   there are already that are Peruvians right  .  
Ah  ,   aha
No  ,   but well  .  
Aha  ,   and what  ,   and  ,   and but maybe is like the Chinese in the United States  ,   that since they have Chinese names  ,   and since they look Chinese  ,   one keeps thinking of them as Chinese  .  
Sure  ,   I mean  ,   they are different places  ,   but well  ,   one really doesn't know why they have their facial features  ,   so similar  .  
yes yes yes  ,   yes  .  
or if he's Chinese  ,   Japanese
yes  ,   yes yes yes  ,   because one  ,   doesn't distinguish
Something like that
the difference like that Perhaps the Vietnamese  ,   one  ,   one distinguishes them faster  .  
But  ,   eh  ,   between Chinese and Japanese and Koreans  ,   I don't distinguish  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
Aha
Look  ,   and  ,   thinking of what famous Peruvian I know  ,   eh  ,   I'm thinking of Mario Vargas Llosas  .  
Ah yes  ,    how and why  ?  
No  ,   really  ,   I don't know because maybe he doesn't like it  ,   but
It could be because of the politic  ,   because I remember that he started
Hm
quite to the left  ,  
No
and later  ,   through the
yes  ,   he even  ,   even ran for the presidency of the country  .  
that  ,   oh yes  ,   I remember that  ,   and never knew
Hm
the details of  ,   of  ,   of  ,   I only knew that  ,   without  ,   without any detail  ,   of  ,   of  ,   of
Hm mm
eh  ,   that and and and he got close to winning  ,   or never had a chance to win  .  
Aha
No  ,   but yes but he lost  .    Well  ,   like  ,   since he had recently entered  ,   he hadn't been in politics long  ,   everyone knew him as a writer  ,   no  ,   but it's different than being a  ,   me being a writing  ,   or being a
No  ,   but  ,   he didn't win the presidency  .  
Aha  .    And after this he moved to Spain  ?  
Where  ,   in Peru  ,   or in Spain  ?  
Yes  ,   he became a Spanish national  .  
Ah
And now  ,   now he lives in Spain  ,   but I think that he will always go to Peru  ,   something like that  ,   because he has family  ,   his family is Peruvian  .  
Well  ,   yes  ,   well people have different feelings
yes
they think different things  ,   like everywhere  ,   like here to the policy isn't  ,   umm  ,   very good let's say  ,   everyone favors his
Aha
What's convenient for him  ,   no  .  
No  ,   every  ,   Bush favors the rich more who are his common people  .  
yes
he's making a lot of mistakes  .  
yes  ,   and compared to here there are two parties and in other countries there are many countries  ,   for example  ,   in Peru  ,   how many principle parties are there  ?  
Well  ,   there are also the democrats and the republicans there too  ,   no  .  
Ah  ,   only two  ?  
The others  ,   yes  ,   like  ,   there are several parties  ,  
Aha
it's not like the left and the right  ,   they're called more
Hm
No  ,   or  ,   and the democratic party  ,   I don't know  ,   where and the liberal party  ,   there's  ,   I know  ,   there's about four parties that are most prominent  ,   and there are other smaller ones
Ah
there there are always
And today  ,   what party is in the government  ?  
Hmmm
No  ,   what party is in the government in Peru today  ?  
Hmm  ,   Aye  ,   I don't even know  .    I know that it's Toledo  ,   but I don't know what party this would be  .  
Aha  ,   aha  .    And how's this president  ,   do they see him well or do they still feel like he's not helping  ?  
No  ,   it's the  ,   the crisis is there as always  ,   no  .  
Ah yes yes
they go hungry  ,   there they also go hungry  .  
Sure  ,   like  ,   here you  ,   you're surprised thinking that it's a very advanced country  ,   and you come here  ,   and you say  ,   well not really  ,   you will meet people who are beggars or something like that
But you find them everywhere
yes  ,   yes  ,   it's a shame really
Aha
yes  ,   and  ,   hmm what's it called  ,   and Peru em  ,   tell me a little big about the regions of Peru  ,   and what regions it's divided into  .  
Aha
There's a lot of jungle  .  
Hmm
No  ,   that goes to Brazil  .  
How pretty it must be  ,   it must give this so much diversity  .  
Aha
No  ,   but there are some small  ,   small groups that are still descendants from the indigenous  ,   and they're conserved there and after  ,   well  ,   in the jungle of course  ,   there are these native groups  .  
Like aborigines  ?  
yes  ,   aborigines  ,   ah  .  
Ah
Sure  ,   including  ,   like  ,   the Amazonian jungle  ,   it's a very very deep jungle  ,   and you really don't know who lives there
Hmm
There are human groups that are unknown  .  
Aha aha
No  ,   there are small  ,   small indigenous groups  ,   but the majority are interracial  ,   Spanish crossed with Indians  .    Hmm
Aha aha yes  ,   Well  ,   and are you an American citizen  ?  
No  ,   I'm a resident
Who can  ,   ah resident  ,   yes  ,   because you have to be a resident for five years yes  ,   and  ,   what do the Latinos in Atlanta think about politics here in the United States  ?  
Aye  ,   well  ,   I don't know  ,   the majority  ,   I don't think that the majority really agree  ,   above all for the undocumented people who are here
Ah  ,   why  ,   why don't they restrict them  ?  
Sure  ,   well here the  ,   here in Georgia the undocumented people can't drive  ,   they can't have  ,   well they drive  ,   but they drive because they want to drive  ,   they can buy a car  ,   drive  ,   and I don't know how they do it  ,   but anyway
They can't have  ,   no  ,   licen 
Hello
Hello
Hi  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   fine  ,   and you  ?  
fine thanks  ,   my name is Ernestina
Ernestina
aha
Okay my name is Zulma
Zulma
aha  ,   Zulma
oh Zulma  ,   and where you do live  ?  
in Houston  ,   Texas
oh boy  ,   and me New York New York
in New York  ,   ah  ,  
yes
And where are you from originally  ?  
Where  ?    in  ,   in the Bronx
from wh  what  ?  
The Bronx
from the Bronx ah okay  ,   have you always lived there in the Bronx  ?  
Right  ,   i live in the Bronx
¿Have you always lived in the Bronx  ,   your whole life  ?  
Yes  ,   yes
Oh
Yeah  ,   ¿and you  ?  
Oh  ,   no  ,   I'm from Puerto Rico
Oh  ,   my mom  ,   she came from Puerto Rico and my father is black  .   So  ,   you know
Uh huh
And  ,   ¿how many years have you lived in Texas  ?  
Oh  ,   i have been living here for only four years
Oh  ,   and  ,   ¿do you like Texas  ?  
Oh  ,   no  ,   i don't like Texas  ,   it's not
No  ,   uh
Uh  ,   it doesn't have mountains  ,   it's very hot  ,   very wet
Yeah
And Houston is very big but it doesn't feel like a city  ,   like New York does  ,   everything's too far away  ,   there's never anyone in Downtown  ,   no one walks on the street
No  ,   right
it's not  ,   it's a big city  ,   but it doesn't feel like a traditional big city
wow
Yes  ,   uh huh  ,   and it's getting better  ,   temperatures are dropping but on July and August  ,   the heat is horrible
mm oh my aunt lives in Dallas
aha
but it has many people from Louisiana  ,   New Orleans now right  .  
yes  ,   yes there are many people that  ,   who came over here there are many people that had come here also before the hurricane  ,   yes
ah the people are in the street
ah  ,   I think that they've found temporary housing for the majority of the people  .   ah  ,   the government ah  ,   found them apartments or
oh
ah  ,   places that they use for camping  ,   or for weekend activities they are using them as temporary housing  .  
yeah
but I think that the majority of the people have decided not to return to New Orleans because since they are so unstable and they couldn't fix the dams and they don't know if there's another flood and the same thing will happen  .  
mm
many people have decided that they are not going to return  .  
yeah
so I don't know if all those people will stay here and it will be hard for  ,   for all of them to find jobs  ,   and
yeah yeah
mm  ,   mm
is a big problem  ,   right
yes  ,   yes
ah a lot of water in the street  .  
aha
oh boy that is very  ,   very bad
mm
and  ,   and politics  ,   you know ah  ,   ah  ,   politics
yes  ,   yes  ,   I don't know why they don't change the topic  ,   I've been talking about politics for the last five days  .  
I don't know much true
yes  ,   ah Yes they don't change the topic  ,   I wrote them a message  ,   I sent them an email to the person who's in charge of the study and I asked if I had to talk about politics all the time and he told me no  .  
aha
that if I got tired of talking about the topic I didn't have I could talk of anything  ,   that after that
yeah
that we have a natural conversation and that it lasts twelve minutes  ,   it doesn't matter what we are talking about so if you don't want to talk about politics we don't have to talk about politics  ,   mm
right every day ah  ,   How many calls do you have now  ?  
ah  ,   I think that like eight or nine  .  
me  ,   ah  ,   like maybe thirteen
really  ,   oh wow mm
yeah thirteen maybe fourteen
mm
ah
And how did you find out about the study  ?  
what  ?  
How  ,   how did you know about the study  ?  
ah ah I don´t know
someone told you  ,   oh  ,  
oh  ,   oh yeah  ,   yeah my  .   my friend she tells me she told me And you  ?  
Hmm hmm yes and I  ,   I found it  ,   there is a website named craiglist
oh  ,   yeah  ,   yeah
yes and I always look there  ,   hmm
is that true  ,   a craiglist
hmm
maybe my friend
hmm
no my friend  ,   my friend
hmm
you know
hmm
that is nice that is very good  .   all the days he calls  ,   a call uh I  ,   I  ,   I called everyday
ah  ,   oh
I called
called
called all the days
hmm  ,   yes
and a long time
mm
mm and you have kids and kids and
and no  ,   I have two cats  .  
two cats no husband
mm  ,   mm no sons nor daughters  ,   no  ,   no
no  ,   boyfriend
yes I have a boyfriend
oh  ,   well
yes  ,   mm yes
I've had a husband for twenty  ,   twenty years  .  
aha oh wow
yeah  ,   I'm forty eight
oh yes  ,   I'm only twenty six
oh  ,   you  ,   you are very young yeah
well at my age my mom already had three kids  ,   yes
oh yeah
yes  ,   yes
and ah  ,   you go to school
yes I'm  ,   I go to nursing school
Oh yeah  ,   you like school
Uh um
Um  ,   ¿what did you say  ?    ,   ¿what did you say  ?  
¿What  ?  
Are you studying in school  ?  
Oh  ,   nursing  ,   nursing
Oh
uh huh  ,   uh huh
Oh  ,   that's good
Yes  ,   there's a lot of work
Yeah
So i don't have to worry much about becoming unemployed
Oh
And  ,   ¿have you ever gone to Puerto Rico  ?  
yes
Yes  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   i moved four years ago  ,   but i still go there  ,   i go there every year
Oh  ,   and  ,   oh
Yes
You come from  ,   ¿you come here to New York  ?  
Yes  ,   i have one  ,   yes  ,   i have an aunt that lives there in Brooklyn
Oh
and i have been there three times
Oh yeah
Yes  ,   uh huh
Oh  ,   that's good
Yes
And i live in the Bronx  ,   but there's a lot of people that  ,   that has  ,   and it's very poor
Yes
And it does have lots of Puerto Ricans  ,   Dominicans
Uh huh
Uh  ,   Mexicans
uh huh
You know  ,   but the people is really poor
Uh huh
They don't have a lot of pesos [dollars]  ,   and  ,   ¿are you rich  ?  
That's why I'm doing this study  ,   because i have a huge load of money
yeah
No  ,   I'm studying full time now  ,   so i don't work
Yeah  ,   yeah
Uh huh
And what  ,   what time do you  ,   go to school  ,   at night  ?  
no  ,   no I go during the day  ,  so I am not working because I go to school during the day  .  
oh Doy you also speak English  ?   that is good And What else  ?  
hmm
yeah That´s good That is good  .  
only English and Spanish hmm hmm
That is very good  .   And where are your cats now  ?  
oh  ,   here with me
Are they big or small  ?  
no  ,   they are big they are  ,   a   .  male and a female
oh
the female cat weights around ten pounds and the male around sixteen pounds  .  
wow
hmm they are big yes
uh
hmm
how big
yes  ,   but it is good that I have two  ,   because as I have to study a lot and I am
yeah
studying nursing I have to do the practice twelve hours at the hospital  .  
wow
so it's good that they're two because the entertain each other  ,   I don't know  ,   they don't get bored alone here in the apartment  .  
yeah  ,   that's not good  ,   one alone  .  
mhm mhm yes
you know  ,   And do you live in a big house or  ,   do you have a small house  ?  
Yes it's a very small apartment  ,   yes
oh
mhm
and me too
mhm
I have an apartment
mm
apartment
And do you have children  ?  
yes  ,   no I have a daughter  ,   a daughter
mhm aha
and just that
oh
fifty years  ,   fifty two oh  ,   my  ,   daughter  ,   no  ,   no  ,   she's ah  ,   my sister is fifty two years old  .  
aha
My daughter is thirty  ,   yes  ,   she's  ,   she's a lawyer  ,   lawyer
Lawyer  ,   yeah  ,   uh
Lawyer
And  ,   ¿does she live there in New York too  ?  
Yes  ,   she lives in New Jersey
OK
¿Do you know New Yersey  ?  
Uh huh  ,   yes  ,   uh huh
Oh  ,   you know a lot  ,   oh
Yes  ,   i visited
oh
uh  ,   yes  ,   i was going to visit but i decided to come to Houston
Oh  ,   that's good
Uh huh
That's very good  ,   good
Uh huh
And  ,   ¿where are you visiting  ,   oh  ,   what other  ?    ,   wait  ,   ¿where are you visiting  ?  
Uh  ,   ¿where else have i gone to here in the United States  ?  
Yes
I have a sister that lives in Florida
aha
and
wow how nice Florida
yes she lives in Tampa
oh
then I go visit her quite often  .   but I've been in Nevada
oh wow
yes in Omaha
oh how nice
and mm
hello
hello  ,   ah  ,   what's your name  ?    eh  ,   what's your name  ?    eh sorry
hi it doesn't matter  ,   Any  ,   yes
Any  ,   I'm Pilar  ,   I think that we've talked once before
I think so too  ,   how are you  ?  
fine fine  ,   and you  ?  
who is it  ?  
eh what do  yes
where are you calling from  ?    ah  ,   I'm calling from Miami
from New York  ,   hmm  ,   what do you think about religion  ?    what these people said  ,   do you think it divides people or not  ?  
it depends I think that if you have the same  ,   ehh  ,   the language or thoughts that the other person has but if they're different I think it divides  ,   of course  ,   because
if you're Christian  ,   and the other is Jewish and the other is Muslim  ,   I don't remember how you say it in Spanish  ,   they won't have the
Muslim  ,   eh  ,   Muslim
aha  ,   they won't have the same  ,   you know  ,   religion or the same idea or whatever
yes but you think that this divides people  ,   you think that the fact of having a different religion that they can't at least
be friends or get along well
no  ,   what I want to say is that they can be friends and they can get a lot but when the topic of religion of course they will be  ,   you know  ,   divided because they don't believe in the same
but I don't think that if you know  ,   if a person is Christian  ,   another person is Jewish  ,   that they can't be friends  ,   of course
hmm
this is also something personal because some people aren't like this either  ,   you know
yes  .  
because they believe that if you are not what you know  ,   if not  ,   if you don't believe what they believe well then
or that it's not so much in your opinion  ,   not is so much the religion that divides but rather the people themselves that use religion  ,   at best
in some way more  ,   more extreme or more no  ,   and to separate from society or from people of other religions  .  
yes  ,   yes  .  
no  ,   or I mean the religion itself  ,   or at least the religion  ,   religions that I'm familiar with teach you to be tolerant  ,   teach you to be  ,   to be good
right  ?  
yes
They don't teach ah  ,   that the people from other religions should be despised or that they don't deserve to live or anything like that  ,   right  ?  
yes
religion doesn't teach you that  ,   and yet there are people  ,   those who are very extreme and interpret it that way
yes  ,   but it's true  ,   but also I believe that if it  ,   eh  ,   you know  ,   if you are so  ,   um  ,   talking on the theme of religion  ,   or whatever  ,   you know
so then this is what divides also  ,   because I can't let's say if  ,   if I am Jewish and I can't say if I believe what you believe
or I eh  ,   eh think the same as what you think if you are a Christian  ,   because they aren't  ,   you know
yes
they are not the same religion in that way  ,   but at the same time you know  ,   I believe that
yes but this isn't a reason for division  ,   the fact that this  ,   in all the themes  ,   people have distinct opinions  ,   distinct beliefs  ,   and this doesn't
Does not have to bring any problem to anyone  ,   you know  ?   No division  .  
yes  ,   yes and no but what I want to say that if it's worth living because I can't  ,   you can't have your opinion because what I want to say that we are not going to
be equal  ,   if we are not equal we are not united  ,   so then we are divided  ,   you understand  ?  
well it also depends on if you're referring to being divided  ,   like  ,   I think that the fact that people have different religions and different beliefs  ,   well
that if everyone were equal  ,   I don't think that there would be fewer problems  ,   it would be boring
yes
but being divided also  ,   like  ,   in my opinion refers more to the fact that people don't speak to each other  ,   there aren't problems in
that society is divided into groups of people who have different religions and fight between themselves like has happened  ,   has happened in history like keeps happening now  ,   this is why I refer to the division
yes  ,   no
the fact  ,   the fact that people living in the same country have different beliefs  ,   and they can get along well  ,   I don't see any problem  ,   no  ?  
no no no this  ,   you know  ,   because I don't think that I can tell someone how to live or what to
believe  ,   this is something that you know  ,   they have to  ,   eh  ,   you know  ,   I can't think of the word  ,   eh
hmm
it's something that the person has to do himself  ,   his own decision  ,   you know  ,   it's not something that I can say to someone
you have to believe this  ,   you have to believe that
sure but no
so you know
well it depends on the in  on how easy it is to influence this person because in the end when we're kids
yes
the religions are instilled in us  ,   and tell us that you have to believe this  ,   and as kids we're very impressionable
yes
they believe it
yes
ah what else it said in the topic
oh I don't know I never understand him
yes I heard is that
he is very hard for me  ,   I just hear
not hear the message was terrible  ,   terribly said I hardly hear it but I did understand something else but is that I don't remember what he has said  ,   ah I don't remember
well  ,   eh we can talk about something else it doesn't have to be the topic
no no it does have to be about the topic if it's not the topic the call is not valid
no I read the instructions and they said that the topic is to help you but one doesn't necessarily have to talk about the topic
ah really
because I  ,   I had a lot of problems once with a person that couldn't connect  ,   we couldn't talk and I read the instructions and that's what they said
ah well ah yes yes
so that pardon
no keep on keep on that you get cut  ,   keep on
eh  ,   but if you prefer we can talk  ,   keep talking about the topic if
ah I don't care is that I thought  ,   I had read that if you don't talk of the topic it doesn't count  ,   the call doesn't count  ,   that if you talked of something else it didn't count
that's why  ,   that's why I always try to talk about the topic
okay  ,   well so let's continue with the topic because
but no
what I said  ,   I read it because I thought that it was that it said something like that if those know that these conversations are very eh
abnormal so to speak then they give you the topic to help you
yes of course
when I have eh talked with the other people eh
not always  ,   not always do we talk about the topic
we talk yes the other day I talked with a guy from New York who was a cop
yes
and we spent the whole time talking of you know his job because I found it very interesting but eh
but the calls you don't know yet  ,   is that
I don't know I think that the only reason if the call is valid or not valid is if you have talked for twelve minutes
mm
is what I think which that has happened to me many times  ,   well it has happened like four times that I'm talking with a person and the call gets cut off
ah yes it hasn't happened to me
yes oh what happened to me yesterday was that they called me and told me okay wait on the line for the other participant and then suddenly they tell me bye and hung up on me
and me okay
no no that hasn't happened to me
so
and well anyways returning to the topic  ,   are you then religious or not  ?   or you don't have any religion  ?  
ambitious
religious
oh um I don't think of myself as religious I you know read the bible  ,   go to church  ,   eh you know pray with my family but for me a
a religious person  ,   is a person that has many rules  ,   many eh
well  ,   what I mean is that is if you have a religion or not  ,   tht's what I mean
yes  ,   I think I do  ,   yes
eh  ,   but what are you  ?   are you Catholic or what  ?  
Christian  ,   mm
Christian  ,   and what do you think about the other religions then  ?   what do you think about Muslims  ?   do you believe in God  ?   oh now I remembered what the subject was about  ,   I just remembered
whether we believe that religions are actually different ways of seeing the same thing  ,   for instance jewish  ,   Muslims and Christians
they all pretend the same  ,   they are based in the same book  ,   well they are not based in it but Jewish and Christians are in the old Testament
and Muslims do have also an Old Testament as a part of their religion
mhm
it's funny  ,   isn't it  ?   so  ,   how do you see that  ?   would you say it's three different ways of  ,   ah  ,   actually adoring the same God  ?  
it's more or less the same  ,   isn't it  ?  
well I think that  ,   to start with the Jewish  ,   that the Bible  ,   the first part of the Bible  ,   the Old Testament
yes  ,   mhm  ,   yes
is the same thing that thy believe in  ,   I think that if it was not for the Old Testament
listen
¿Hi  ?  
¿Hello  ?  
Hi
Hi
I'm Miguel Angel  ,   ¿who are you  ?  
Oh  ,   José
¿José  ?  
Yes  ,   José
Hi  ,   ¿and where are you  ?  
Uh  ,   in Philadelphia
Oh  ,   me too
Oh  ,   you too  ,   no i think  ,   you work at  ,   uh  ,   ¿are you a student at Penn  ?  
Yes too  ,   yes  ,   in Penn
Of  ,   it was Biology  ,   ¿wasn't it  ?  
No  ,   no  ,   of Chemistry  ,   yes  ,   yes
No  ,   Chemistry  ,   yes  ,   i have spoken to you before
Oh  ,   oh  ,   we talked  ,   that's true  ,   we talked the other day  ,   ¿right  ?  
Yes  ,   yes
Yes  ,   that you're doing Economy  ,   ¿right  ?  
Exactly  ,   exactly
Yes  .   How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   fine here  ,   just doing a little bit of homework  ,   of math and
Aha  .  
and they called  ,   then yeah well  ,   why not rest a little  ,   right  ?  
Sure  ,   me too  ,   they have also called me  ,   yes they called me yesterday and I couldn't couldn't accept the call because I was busy  ,   and today I say  ,   well
Eh
well I'm going to talk a while
Yes  ,   yes  ,   no because
Very good  ,   sure  .  
because that's at six in the evening  .   Eh  ,   eh  ,   of the afternoon  ,   and  ,   and at nine  ,   right  ,   and if one doesn't get it  ,   already  ,   is hard
Yes  ,   sometimes well there are days that they call you twice  .   I
to find  .  
if you don't answer at six  ,   perhaps later at seven  ,   later at eight they call you again
Eh  .  
But yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   and
Sip  .  
I sometimes don't want to call myself but but is sure  ,   if there's no other person waiting for the call  ,   well  ,   sure  ,   no  ,    .  
Eh  .   No  ,   but the problem with  ,   with that of six is that that  ,   because I talk on the cellular phone  ,   then I have a limit of how much I can talk during the day  .  
Ah  ,   okay  .  
and  ,   eh  ,   then is a bit annoying  ,   but  ,  
Ah  ,   but I think that this call is free
eh  ,   yes  ,   this no 
I mean they don't charge you anything  ,   no  ?   But this call
No  ,   no  ,   well  ,   well  ,   they don't charge me but there is a limi  I  I have six hundred minutes each month
Ah  ,   yeah  ,   independent from the number you call
And  ,   Exactly  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   So  ,   because I don't have a land line
Aha
so  ,   like that  ,   normal  ,   like from from home  ,   it's just a  ,   a cell  phone  ,   it's the  ,   the only thing I have
Yeah  ,   yeah You don't have a line
Yes
Do  why  ,   where are you living  ,   in a college  ?  
I don't have a land line  ,   no  ,   no  ,   no  .   Only a cell  .  
Yeah  ,   yeah  ,  
Yes  .  
but where are you living  ,   e  eh  college house or  ,  
Oh  .  
in a dorm  ,   or
Yes  ,   well  ,   in a fraternity house  .  
Pardon  ?   A fraternity  ?   Ah  .  
I  in a yes  ,   yes  ,   so no  ,   here there's a public phone  .  
Yeah  .  
Below  .  
And you don't have a phone in the room  ?  
And it's the university's  .   No  ,   I don't have a phone in the room  .  
Ah  ,   that I believed you had  ,   ah yeah  ,   yeah  ,   hm mm  ,   hm mm  ,   yeah
But yeah  ,   yeah  ,   yeah  ,   it almost doesn't matter any more  ,   because
No  ,   with the phones  ,   yes
now almost every one yes  ,   yes  ,   now almost every one that I  ,   I know that that lives  ,   well that only lives in the dorms one has a line  ,   right  ,   but
all the same  ,   the people  ,   every one has cell phones  ,  
Everyone
all those who live
every one has  ,   how  ,   how do you call them here  ,   cells
all  ,  all the students that
in Spain we call it mobile
Sure  ,   the mobiles  ,   ah  ,  
Yes  ,   mobiles  .   But  ,   both  ,   if it's mobile the cell  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
Yes  .   Yes  ,   no  .  
Everyone has it  .   Yeah  .   And it's not necessary to have a phone pre  ,   pre fixed yeah
No  ,   no  ,   and also  ,   every one that lives  ,   um  ,   like in an apartment that  ,   like that  ,   that  ,   that  ,   that doesn't  ,   that doesn't  ,   that doesn't live in the dorms  ,  
almost no one has a phone  ,   like that a land line  .  
Sure  ,   because they telephone is really expensive because you have pay  ,   eh  ,   even if you don't consume  ,   even if you don't use it  ,   you have to pay a minimum quota  .    And besides  ,  
and then  ,   after if you have the cell  ,   well  ,   because  ,   no  ,   and many people don't use nu 
So  ,   exactly  .  
they're never at home  ,   and prefer people to call the cell  ,   and  ,  
Yes  .  
This happened to me  ,   I have  ,   I have a land line  ,   but the truth is that I give the same  ,   and I don't know why I have it  ,   because
Yes  .  
because I never use it
No  ,   no  ,   a land line is good  ,   for example  ,   if you have a family and it's a home  ,   there are several people  ,   and
Yeah  .    Sure
you  ,   eh  ,   because
Sure
you will need so  something right  ,   on the phone  ,   and maybe several people want to get on the phone  ,  
Sure  ,   I also keep the telephone you know why  ,   because
I don't know but  ,   yes  .  
if I want to call my family in Spain  ,   it's much cheaper  .  
Ah  .  
to call them from a land line than from a cell phone  ,   you know  .    S 
And  ,   but  ,   and do you use the  ,   the calling cards  ?  
Ah  ,   yes  .    yes  ,   I started to use it this call but you know what happens  ,   every time I call yes
Ah
Then  ,   I'm calling Spain less and less every day  ,   then it's almost not worth it  ,   you now  ,   to buy a card that maybe will expire soon
Ah  ,   that's true  ,   that's true
the balance  ,   or
It's true  ,   it's true
you know  .   At first  ,   I did buy them  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   Because I called a lot  .   But now I don't call that often to  ,   eh  ,   to Spain
But  ,   the calls  ,   the calls to Spain must be almost free  ,   right  ,   with the  ,   with the phone card  .   I guess
I see  .   Well  ,   it's not  .   It's cheap  .   I think that  ,   well  ,   look  .   About the phone  ,   I'm living in Samson Place  ,   well
Because  ,   uhm  ,   well  ,   I lived in France  ,   because I studied in France for a few months  .   So when I was there
Yeah  ,   yeah
my mom used to call me
yes
And it was  ,   say  .   I was three cents a minute  ,   two cents a minute
Yes  ,   yes  ,   no and
Still  ,   it is still more expensive the cell phone  ,   yes
No  ,   it is incredible  ,   because  ,   um  ,   we call from Guatemala  ,   because there because my dad my dad lives in Guatemala  ,   and
Of course  ,   of course  .  
For a minute  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
yes  .   And now  ,   we are paying fifteen cents  .  
but well  ,   that makes sense  ,   because of course  ,   television has got cheaper the telephone because because because permanent phones loose territory against the cell phone  .  
attractive  ,   to people use them  ,   Well  ,   they are cheaper
Yes  .  
and everybody uses cellular  ,   you know  .  
Yes  ,   yes  .   For calls  ,   yes  .  
That is  ,   that is  .  
Yes  ,   but  .  
they transmit through  perhaps is only of the internet right  ,   but  ,  
That is  .  
is some similar mechanism  ,   right  .   Then they transmit
Sure
in their network much more efficiently  .  
Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   perfect  .  
Mm hmm  .  
uh huh  ,   uh huh  .   Yes  ,   or if  ,   what can you do  ,   of course  .  
they have  ,   they have been able to do it much more efficiently  .   So then
Yes  ,   in Spain pa  in Spain the same thing happened  .  
Yes  ,   ah  ,   yes  ,   yes  .   With the Telephone monopoly
Because Telephones was a public company
Hm
And  ,   then when they privatized  ,   well  ,   I'm not sure  ,   it's not  ,   I don't know if they had privatized everything  .   I believe that now yes  ,   they have privatized it all  .  
From other  ,   from other telephone companies  ,   and  ,   and other companies came in  ,   well  ,   not that they came in  ,   it's that they created telephone companies in Spain besides the Telephone  .  
And "Telefonica" begun to low the prices because they had competence  .   Before  ,   like they were the only ones  ,  
well  ,   they could charge what they wanted you know  .  
And  ,   of course  .  
and  ,   and  ,   "Telefonica"  .  
now the  ,   now many Spanish companies  ,   Spanish have invested abroad  ,   specially in Latin America  ,   Specially "telefonica"  ,   because the market  ,   of Spain
it has became more difficult  ,   right  .   There is  ,   there is more competence and it is a more mature market  ,   then
they are in Latin  ,   Latin  ,   Latin America where still nobody has a cell phone  ,  there are many   many possibilities  .  
Aha  .  
have invested
Yes
yes  ,   in these economies  .    It's very interesting  .  
Aha  .  
Aha
So  ,   for example  ,   Prosegur  ,   this was one of the companies  ,   so I had  ,   it's an insurance company  .    So I had to go on the internet to see
Ah  ,   well  ,   this is  ,   this is interesting  ,   right  ?  
And yes  ,   so  ,   so I went  ,   true  ,   I learned that many  ,   a lot of Spanish companies  ,   and what they were doing  ,  
Hmmm  ,   hmmm  .  
no  ,   but  ,   Yes  ,   well yes  .    The  ,  
No  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .    No  ,   and there  ,   e 
In eighty six  ,   since then  ,   it seems that companies say  ,   well  ,   all of a sudden they have more competition  ,   and  ,   and they have  ,  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   no  .  
If one want to continue all of a sudden  ,   they started to to  ,   to  ,   invest abroad  ,   yes  .  
Eh  ,   yes  .  
Hm
Social too  ,   I mean
It's true  ,   it's true  .  
socio  the way of thinking  ,   the people  ,   more openness  ,   you know I don't know  ,   I mean  ,   more  ,   I mean
Yes  ,   it's true  .   No  ,   no  ,   I  .  
Yes  ,   yes  .  
Ah  ,   yes yes
well in Spain  ,   believe me  ,   the change has been total  .  
like you could be something else
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  .  
because it was practically  ,   not just the official religion  ,   but obligatory  ,   you know
Hmm
And nevertheless  ,   after  ,   well  ,   when Franco died  ,   and  ,   in seventy eight the whole Spanish constitution  ,   well  ,   was given freedom of worship
and everyone could have the religion that they wanted  ,   you know  .    But  ,   with Francoism  ,   no  ,   in fact the regime is
Good afternoon  ,   how are you  ?  
Good  ,   thanks  ,   and you  ?  
Good  ,   I think that we have already spoken before right  .  
What  ,   where are you  ?  
I'm in Atlanta  ,   Georgia Norma
Ah  ,   Norma  ,   how are you  ,   I'm Josefina  ,   in Philadelphia  ,   yes  .  
Ah yes yes  ,   we spoke before
You remember now aha  ,   Yes  ,   they're like tuning us around no  ,   to  to once again  .  
One round yes yeah that look  it looks like it  ,   but
Aha
I  ,   I don't care well  ,   to chat again we keep going on and on no  .   This about religion ouch My God  ,   this people  .  
Hmm mm
I don't know about you but I'm Catholic  ,   well we do have lots of people that are Catholics here too  .   Others are from different areas of Christianity and not all
Aha  ,  
The different religions  ,   the different denominations  .  
No  ,   really and we  ,   one really unifies with a religion  ,   it unites people because even  ,   when there are natural disasters  ,   it doesn't matter which religion you have  .  
That's right  ,   it's like
Hm mm
everybody gets together and they start  ,   praying or  ,   to
Sure  ,   I mean  ,   it's
in their own words  ,   they each use their words  .  
you always look for God's help  .  
You always know there's a superior being that's gonna help us  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   and
Yes  ,   of course
you go to it's mercy
and how's  ,   ¿how's the situation there right now  ?    ,   the weather and all that
¿Where  ,   here in Atlanta  ,   Georgia  ?  
Oh  ,   right  ,   ¿oh yes  ?  
Yes  ,   i mean  ,   more or less  ,   right  ,   like it always is  ,   always the crisis  ,   the gas has increased a lot and
Right  ,   there comes this thing that  ,   right  ,   oh my god
Yes  ,   the gas has increased a lot  ,   three dollars thirty  ,   something like that  ,   the regular
Right
No  ,   and  ,   uh
And it's being spent
Sure  ,   and people  ,   well
And it wears away quickly
Now there's one that they're looking after others  ,   some  ,   uh
uh  ,   uh
alternatives  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   to driving  ,   or car pooling or something like that
They're selling here  ,   i see lots of people who have large vans
Yes
the new  ,   pretty ones  ,   but  ,   they put them on sale
Oh  ,   oh  ,   they're selling those  ,   sure  ,   because they consume lots of gas  ,   really
For sale  ,   oh
you spend a lot on gas
they turn
uh huh
or  ,   money runs like water
That's true  ,   the people really hasn't had much  ,   and they say "oh  ,   i have s little  ,   I'm gonna save"
Right
And in the end  ,   they don't save anything
They go
Yes  ,   yes  ,   you think you're saving and in the end  ,   it turns away and the money is over
You get  ,   uh  ,   yeah  ,   you get in a bad mood
Yeah  ,   right
Because  ,   instead of spending ten  ,   you spent twenty five  ,   and such  ,   where you're going to do
Sure
If one goes out to buy something  ,   you always remember that you missed something  ,   then
Hm mm
ah me
Yes  ,   in small things  ,   even if one doesn't feel it  ,   later already
Yes  ,   I don't know and so hard already for money to come in  ,   right  .   It goes out fast  ,   but nothing  ,   to come in you have to look for it  ,   really look for it  .  
Ah  ,   is it hot there  ?  
No  ,   it's already like  ,   like autumn already of
It's already getting cold here too  .   Yes  ,   the mornings are very cold  .  
is not too Yes  ?  
Aha
Aha  ,   here also  ,   and one closes the windows  ,   then later
Hm mm
at noon it gets hot  .  
Yes
You feel hot  ,   and later again now starts a little cooler  ,   to get cooler  .   But you don't have to wear a coat  ,   is
No  ,   no  ,   not yet
Everything is good now  .  
Ah
Seeing things
Yes  ,   you open the  ,   no  ,   if you see the news on the internet  ,   television  ,   you get more depressed because so many calamities  ,   that someone dies  ,   that someone killed himself  ,  
Aha  ,   yes no  ,   drownings  ,  
They killed someone  ,   that  ,   that I
Yes  ,   ah  ,   no  ,   the crimes have returned
Yes
so  ,  
Much violence  ,   really in this world no
yes  ,   I don't understand  .  
I say that I have two  ,   two tendencies in this aspect  .    Sometimes I like  ,   sure  ,   that they help everyone in the world to be equal  ,   and that everyone has the same opportunities  .  
and at best they will hurt someone  ,   hmm  ?  
Aha  ,   yes  ,   this is true  ,   there's always
I get a like radical on that  ,   of being more strict  ,   right  ?    ,   the people selection  ,   right  ?  
the problem is that I used to live in Los  Angeles  ,   in a neighborhood beside the gay district
Oh  ,   OK
No  .   And form my window I could see other buildings where the gays lived in  .   And they used to cry a lot at night
Hm mm
they were there  ,   well dressed in their suits and ties  ,   but
Hm mm
they were suffering  .   I remember I did that comment  .   Oh  ,  m but that people is unhappy
And they look so fine  ,   but yeah
they can do anything  ,   because  ,   due to their sexual tendencies
They are criticized  ,   exactly
Yes  ,   no  ,   and now it is
They  ,   got together themselves  ,   and instead of laughing they were crying  .   And I thought  ,   oh well  ,   is this people never gonna be happy  ?  
Because they used to make parades  ,   you know  ,   they went out embraced
Hm mm
parading on the streets
Sure
But yet  ,   they were somehow rebels  ,   sad  ,   I don't know
Sure  ,   I mean  ,   sometimes I
Eh
I think that there are times  ,   a situation  ,   very  ,   no  ,   very terrible for them  ,   no  .  
to  ,   to too extreme  .    Like  ,   for each one here that each one has their freedom  ,   no one gives them  ,   there are people who are really born
so  ,   they don't have these  ,   these tendencies  ,   this karma  ,   what's it called  ,   from
Of being  ,   eh  ,   changing things  .  
Hmmm
and there was a school for gay kids  ,   who know that  ,   they have this since they're little  ,   and they're
These inclinations  ,   an yes  ,   ah  ,   I didn't know this  .  
Ah  ,   yes  ,  
And and that is what I see  ,   that if for example I'm in their way of being  ,   and they like it like   between themselves  ,  
well I don't know if
Hm mm
if they should  ,   keep on insisting in belonging to others that  ,   that are mixed  .   I don't know  .   I think that would be worth studying a lot right  .  
aha
No  ,   pe 
They are good people  ,   are good friends  ,   I know that
Sure  ,   eh  ,   one well Aha
that there are very good people  .   I like to associate with everybody  ,   but
Hm mm
if they are going to be in a place  ,   they are going to be treating them bad and all that  ,   well
Sure  ,   I mean  ,   that already is
I don't think
part of the karma of each person no  ,   because one is born  ,   I  ,   we believe in one
aha  .  
Yes  ,   of the Buddhists  .  
Yes  ,   I'm  ,   I belong to the  ,   a Hindu religion  .  
Then we believe in the karma  .   Each person has a yes  ,   a reaction for the positive or negative activities that
yes  ,   in the past and in the
No  ,   then that  ,   the case of the gays  ,   is  ,   is a type of karma  ,   that they come to this world to suffer no  .  
Ah very interesting  .  
For some negative activity that they did in their past life  .  
Sure  ,   and that  ,   I mean  ,   the problems live this life as positive as possible  ,   no  ,   according
Hm mm  ,   mm mm
within the  ,   I mean  ,   within their groups  ,   of them  ,   how they are called  ,   no  ,   and is
I say put when they insist
doing the more positive things  ,   so that en the next life  ,   good  ,   they're not suffering like this like now
Yes  ,   I don't know of your  ,   of your religious practices  ,   if there is some rejection of homosexuals or not
Well  ,   really there is not a rejection because it's not  ,   exactly a rejection no
Hm
But always  ,   there always is a group of people that know that your religion there exists a group of people that really that ostracize a
little  ,   a topic like that
Well if you are of the family  ,   of the family
Clearly  ,   or  ,   us here  ,   we accept people  ,   it doesn't matter what inclinations or activities that they have  .   No but  ,   there is a process by which one is purified  ,   and those
oh  ,   it wants to leave
follow some rules  ,   one knows that religion has rules and regulations
Aha
No  ,   and in agreement with that  ,   if one wants to be devout to God  ,   one has to follow rules and regulations  ,   not be homoesexual  ,   o man or woman  ,   because
the same we are all sinful right  .  
Exactly  .  
I would like to know
that one develops his devotion to God  .  
Hm mm
well one doesn't want for one's mind to be distorted  ,   then there's where the thing is  ,   that one is not going to be as open with
with a person  ,   how you treat
Hm mm Sure  ,   there's always that distrust  ,   no  ,   that some
Aha
like are atheists  ,   that are homosexuals
That try to influence  .  
Yes Yes
feminine hormones  ,   and all that matter like that  .  
Good Evening  ,   Good evening  ,   I'm Jou
yes  ,   ah  ,   good evening  ,   ah  ,   I'm Alex  .    From here  ,   Los Angeles  .    Where are you from  ?  
And how are you  ?    How's everything going there in Los Angeles  ?  
It's good  ,   the weather is sunny
Here we have
Everything's good
A bit of bad weather is coming here  ,   a storm is coming here  .    But  ,   the weather's already changing here  ,   the storm  ,   the temperature  ,  
There there are seasons  ,   yes
yes  ,   there in Los Angeles you don't see the seasons  ,   the change  ,   right  ?  
Very little
Very little  ,   yes
yes  ,   a little but not  ,   not like there in Denver
yes  ,   here you really notice  ,   eh  ,   the four seasons  ,   and well  ,   the topic of today is Religion
¿What's your name  ?  
My name is Jou  ,   Jou Mendez
Jou  ,   Jou
Jou
OK
Like José  ,   but Jou
Jou
And you're Alex  ,   and  ,   ¿what's your last name  ?  
Oh  ,   Tovar
Escobar sic  ,   and  ,   ¿are you from Mexico or are you from Los Angeles  ?  
Yes  ,   uh  ,   I'm from here  ,   from Los Angeles
I'm a lot  ,   I'm from Puerto Rico  ,   but I've been living here for like twenty six years here in Colorado
Yes
Yes  ,   even my daughter was born here and all that  ,   ¿do you have a family  ?  
Yes  ,   I'm from  .    .    .   Colombian
Oh  ,   that's good
But i have a small family
I have friends from Colombia  ,   and well  ,   very nice people of good culture and all that  ,   i love the music from there too  ,   their culture
[It's] Very nice over there  ,   ¿have you gone there recently  ?  
No  ,   a very long  ,   long time ago i
yes  ,   wow
Many years
How many years  ?  
Like twenty
Oh  ,   my goodness
I  ,   I  ,   I consider myself American and I am here because I am forgetting Spanish yes
Yeah  ,   to Puerto Rico I have not gone there since since I think that thirteen years ago  ,   when my dad died
yes  ,  
I have not gone  ,   and it has changed a lot  ,   because each time I see  a picture there is something new  ,   they are making new things
Oh  ,   yes all change
Change a lot
And what do you think of religion  ?  
Well religion I think that Eh  ,   today instead of using it to unite people it is been used to divide because of the religion many people is being killed  ,   I
Personally I have a big love for God and And I do have my own religion I Can see the religion is so divided these days  ,   everywhere
from  ,   the religion of the Jews  ,   the Muslims  ,   the one That is practiced as if it was Christian but I really don´t know  ,   so What  ,   what the bible teach us and in the true religion  ,   well
I think it is not practiced today as it should
yes  ,   I  ,   I agree a lot with that  ,   a lot ah  ,   I see much hypocrisy in religion
Me too
a lot and no Well people go to church but the do not Do not practice to themselves  ,   to other people
The same
And the people is so religious  ,   they are so  ,   like I said in Spanish  ,   they judge other people
yes  ,   quite a lot
They judge you and ah  ,   oh  ,   I don't know
it's they way the represent it  ,   for example  ,   it's not that I'm trying to speak badly of the Catholic church but  ,   lately  ,   lots of things have come to light
about the religious people  ,   priests that have done these terrible things and have abused young people and done inappropriate things and now this is coming to light because it was kept hidden for a long time  ,   people knew what was happening
Happening but now it is coming to light and all those claims that have been filed everywhere  ,   here in Colorado there's one from eight people
This happened in the seventies
yes  ,  
and they are  ,   the man that did this  ,   the priest  ,   he died but there's so much people speaking about what he did back then
the now  ,   they have a good basis to file the claim against the Catholic church  ,   but just like the Catholic church  ,   other religions
that claim to follow God  ,   they still  ,   well I say  ,   the Bible says somewhere  ,   by the fruit you will know the
that  ,   if you look at the people and the fruit that they are producing is not good  ,   then it means that something is wrong with that religion
yes  ,   I like the Catholic church  ,   I was raised as one and I think that there's a lot of hypocrites in it  .  
I think so too
And oh
I'm not a Catholic anymore but that's true  ,   I agree with you  ,   I witnessed so  much hypocrites and my dad  ,   I used to think he was a hypocrite too because he used to say  ,   I will remain a Catholic until I die but
while we were attending church he would do other things and then  .  
Oh  ,   and they love money too
No  ,   they love money  ,   he liked to gamble
And the Bible clearly says that you can't love God and money at the same time
Exactly
And what I've seen in religion is a lot of love for money  .    And little help for poor people
And also in the name of the church or God there are these  ,   it's like  ,   they support this war when God  ,   it's not a God of war
No  ,  
and so since they say that he's supporting the  ,   for example here  ,   I really love this nation because it has given me many opportunities  ,   I'm not bashing it or anything but
What I say is that using God to support the armies who are fighting in other countries then is like if all others were bad
And the truth is that in other countries there are these fanatics  ,   true  ,   because for example in Iraq  ,   for example with these fanatics who don't care
And kill people  ,   if they're soldiers that they're killing  ,   or kids  ,   it's  ,   an atrocity  ,   I think it's terrible
yes but  ,   God doesn't deal with killing people or wars
Exactly
in any religion
In any religion
but when there's fanaticism  ,   religion reaches another level
Nevertheless they use it to  ,   to support the cause
For example Catholics use religion to get a lot of money
Exactly
For the pockets of the priests
yes that's why they're so rich
This is something I've never liked  .  
Me neither  ,   and those who are so rich and have  ,   and have their museum of art work and all this there inside of
Of what do they called that  ,   there in Rome is The chapel sixty nine
What  ?  
That is has the Sistine chapel  ,   that has a lot of artist's richness of within the decades  ,   and that  ,   that they guard those treasures for them And all that money  ,   and their participation for example in the times of the
second world war that supported the Nazis a lot also
Is an old religion  .   Very rigid  ,   that doesn't change with the times either That's why I've never liked it
And how do you see the other religions  ,   I mean that are not Christians how
Well  ,   I don't like the Christian conservatives much either because they are very rigid people that judge everyone if one doesn't believe in Jesus Christ in a certain way
aha
You go to hell  .   You are going to burn there  .   And well I think that there are good people in all the religions  ,   there are Jews  ,   there are Muslims  ,   there are
I think that his day will come
Then for God there are no wars or any of that
I think that the only one that can clean this world of so many bad things that are happening is him I know he will do it in its due time
Because man has tried to solve the issues for decades and look how things now keep on getting worse  .   In fact they are so bad that we are
True  ,   the materialism
Those are not Godly things
Yes here the concept is  ,   if you don't have money  ,   you're called a loser because
Ah  ,   this is horrible  .  
yes  ,   religion is more than anything created for man
And modified and everything  ,   in  ,   in its way  .    For example many of these things that I've seen on television from other religions  ,   for example evangelicals teach
yes  ,   exactly
So you believe in this  ,   you can't believe in wars  .  
Instead of learning what's taught in the bible  ,   well  ,   learning what the men teach
hmm  ,   true
And look at home many religions these days say that they're Christian  ,   and have so many different things
You  ,   do you go to a religion  ?    Do you follow or a religion  ?    or do you go to church  ?  
Well  ,   I  ,   I was a Jehovah witness for a long time but not anymore because I had some problems in my marriage that really got to me
in a spiritual way  ,   but that has been my faith since I was a teenager  .   In the beginning I was a Catholic  ,   I was raised as one and then I became a Protestant  ,   I was looking
for something  ,   so I found it and I think that I really found him
And didn't that religion ask you for money the whole time  .  
No  ,   not my religion  ,   they wouldn't ask for money  .  
Hello
Hello
How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   with whom do I have the pleasure of speaking  ?  
ah  ,   Ernestina
sorry  ?  
my name is Ernestina  .    And you  ?  
I'm Silvia
oh  ,   and where do you live  ?  
I live in Philadelphia  .    And you  ,   Ernestina  ?  
ah  ,   New York
Ah New York  ,   ah  ,   nice  ,  
yes  ,   I'm forty eight  .  
hmm
and I have a daughter and she's thirty and she has a son  ,   he's two  .  
aye how nice
And you  ?  
I have three kids
oh
yes  ,   that are  ,   the oldest is twenty four and the youngest is twenty  .  
oh
yes
oh  ,   and the kids live with you  ?  
no  ,   no eh  ,   my daughter lives in Washington  .   And a son is here in Philadelphia but in the city  ,   in the university
ah  ,   how nice
and  ,   and another son is in the state of New York
oh yeah
Eh  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   also in the university
What university  ?  
in  ,   he  ,   that one is in Cornell
Oh Cornell University  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   aha
yes  ,   that's good
and  ,   and yes  ,   And what country are you from  ?  
ah  ,   Bronx
ah  ,   from Bronx
yes
But of Latin parents without a doubt
oh yes  ,   many Latins here  ,   many the people here very poor  ,   you know they don't have money  .  
ah
In the Bronx  ,   they have many  ,   ah  ,   people from Puerto Rico  ,   Dominicans and
look  ,   look
Mexicans and Cubans
aha  ,   aha
and dark skinned too  .  
yes  ,   mhm
you know
And your family from which country do they come from  ?  
my mom comes from Puerto Rico  ,   San Juan and my dad he's black
ah
yes
from the United States  ?  
yes
ah  ,   well how well you learned Spanish  .  
ah  ,   thanks  ,   yes  ,   yes
mm
but my mom  ,   I don't speak much because she doesn't live now  ,   today  ,   you know  ,   she's not alive but and ma  ,   my dad too  .  
They're not alive any more  ,  
yes  ,   no
ah  ,   that's a pity  .  
yeah And you  ?   where are you from  ?  
I  ,   I'm Cuban  ,   yes
Oh Cuban
yes  ,   yes
oh how nice
yes  ,   thanks  ,   yes
and your mom and dad
eh  ,   they are no longer living
oh
yes  ,   eh  ,   yes they were Cuban also  .  
oh  ,   And how many years have you been here in the United States  ?  
in the United States  ,   ah  ,   like forty years  .  
ah Forty
yes  ,   yes  ,   well  ,   more than forty years  ,   yes  .  
oh boy wow  ,   you speak English also  ?  
yes I also speak English
oh boy that's good
yes  ,   yes
And  ,   and ah  ,   that the word today is a yes
religion  .  
you I don't know much about ah
ah
you know
yes  ,   that  ,   they say for one to talk  ,   of   ,   of if religion  ,   if it divides people or if it unites  .   eh I think that it divides more  ,   right  .  
yeah  ,   yes yes And are you Catholic  ?  
yes  ,   I'm Catholic  ,   yes
oh  ,   and me nothing  ,   no
ah nothing and  ,   and the family  ,   your
Me  ,   Catholic  ,   yes
aha
I don't go to church much  ,   you know  ,   I'm very busy
busy
yes  ,   I don't have too much time on Sundays  ,   And you  ?  
mm yes  ,   I don't go to church either  .   And what do you do on Sundays  ?   what  ,   what other obligations do you have  ?  
That has ah  ,   religion
no  ,   what  ,   what other things do you have to do on Sundays  ?  
oh  ,   true  ,   I  ,   I have  ,   to clean my clothes  ,   clean my house ah  ,   and a lot
yes  ,   sure  ,   a lot  ,   a lot of work  ,   look  ,   And what's your grandson's name  ?  
my grandson  ,   is  ,   he is yesterday
ah
and you  ?  
no I don't have any grandchildren
No
not yet
oh  ,   do you have a husband  ?  
no  ,   no  ,   I don't have one I'm divorced  .  
oh  ,   so you live on your own  .  
yes
oh that's good  ,   right  .  
well  ,   it has it's good parts and it's bad parts  ,   and  ,   and you  ?  
no  ,   I like with my husband  ,   but now he is ah  ,   he's going to work
ah
yes  ,   he  ,   he works at night
ah
yes at two a  .  m  .    ,   for acho  ,   eight  .  
From two to eight
aha
from two in the morning
no  ,   no eight in the morning and twelve  ,   today  ,   no  ,   you know you know  ,   today  ,   so  ,   he went  ,   he went to work  .  
ah  ,   he starts working at eight at night  .  
so  ,   no  ,   te  twelve
ah he starts to work at twelve at night  .  
and how early does he have to go  ?  
yes
because it's only nine
yes but the trains don't come  ,   they finish at maybe ten the train finishes  .  
yes
aye how horrible  ,   and how far does he go to work  ?  
yes  ,   wait  ,   wait a moment Kisha I'll call you right back OK by  ,   OK that was my daughter  .  
ah
yes she's a lawyer  .  
yes  ,   I can imagine  ,   mhm
oh  ,   that's not good because she has a  ,   a son and he's already two years old  ,   so  ,   it's too much for her  .  
yeah  ,   yes very  ,   very very  ,   very long time  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes aha
but that is not good for women when you have girls and boys you know
mhm  ,   mhm
you know to work so much  ,   so
yes  ,   I went and then she has to take care of her house  .  
well it's  ,   it's difficult in New York  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   this is true  .    And how  ,   how  ,   you have cats and dogs  ,   nothing  ?  
no  ,   I don't have animals  .  
no  ,   I don't  .    And you  ?  
aha
the  ,   how do you say the  ,   ah  ,   hairs and  ,   they have dandruff
aha  ,   hmm  ,   caspa
so I have  ,   how  ,   how do you say  ?  
dandruff is called caspa  .  
Caspa  ,   and so I have  ,   a   ,   al   ,   ale   ,  
Allergies
yes  ,   I have allergies with dogs and
ah
cats  ,   I can't for me
aye what a shame  ,   ah
sh  sh  shame
it's a shame that you have that allergy  .  
look they told me that the Bronx was eh changing a bit that eh  ,   according to Maniatan everything was too expensive that  ,  
oh yeah
more people with more money is going to the Bronx  .   Is that true  ?  
yes  ,   people that have money live in Manhattan
yes  ,   but they had told me  ,   that  ,   that according to Manhattan it was too expensive  .   that there are people going  ,   with money going to the Bronx and buying in the Bronx  .  
mm
you know many people are poor in the Bronx  .  
mm
you know
mhm  ,   mhm
So  ,   and many  ,   many people in the Bronx too
ah  ,   yes many people  .  
oh yes oh  ,   yes it's a very big problem  .  
yes  ,   and you  ,   in  ,   in Philadelphia doesn't have to many people right  ?  
yes
of  ,   of crime
look in  ,   in I live in the outskirts and here it's a very safe place  .   that  ,   that here really there's no crime  ,   where I live
yes  ,   ah  ,   am  ,   in the ci  city
in  ,   in Philadelphia
oh Philadelphia  ,   yes
because I'm outside
oh and you
Good afternoon  ,   my name is Milgram from Connecticut  .  
How are you  ,   I
From Miami  .  
I spoke to you before  ,   or not  ?  
I think so  .  
How are you  ?  
Fine  ,   thanks and you  ?  
Fine
So listen  ,   is that  ,   is religion  .  
yes  ,  
What religion are you  ?  
Christian  .  
Oh  ,   Christian  .  
And you  ?  
I'm Catholic  .  
So you are the one who has the husband who is also in the religion  ,   right  ?  
yes
Aha
yes
So but  ,   we haven't both discussed this topic yet  ,   right  ?  
yes well we've discussed a lot because I think that you have  ,   you have a granddaughter too
Aha  ,   aha  ,   Hmmm
who was born recently  ,   and
yeah
so
well  ,   let's keep talking here  ,   let's see
Well
So
Eh  ,   eh well  ,   what do you think about religion  ?  
Well  ,   I find that it depends on the religion  ,   sometimes it divides  ,   and sometimes not  .    I visit all the churches  ,   and where they invite me I go  ,  
Hmmm
I don't offend anyone  ,   their religion  ,   but I don't like fanatics either  ,   who  ,   who know you and try to  ,   to put all the religion through their eyes  ,   I don't like it
Hmmm
Because I think that each person is free to think  ,   and  ,   and decides like an adult  .  
Hmmm
But I've visited a lot of the evangelical church  ,  
Hmmm
And they've brought service to the house of what they call  ,   like an oration  ,   those oration circles that they do  .  
Hmmm
But I've participated a lot  ,   because my aunt and my cousin's husband  ,   they both belong to the evangelical church  .  
That's good  .  
Well  ,   and also  ,   ah  ?  
But  ,   no  ,   tell me
No  ,   I was going to say that also  ,   eh  ,   the Jews are the base of the Christian religion  .  
Hmmm
And that I  ,   you know  ,   many times it's not necess  I don't know what I was going to say  ,   I forgot  ,   but  ,   no
But  ,   like you think that  ,   that the Jewish religion  ,   because I  ,   I don't find  ,   like  ,   I find that I  ,   they respect their days  ,   they are very  ,   I think that very
like very organized  ,   I would say  .    You know
Hmmm
But to everyone  ,   religion always divides  ,   because not everyone has the same concept  ,   I think  .  
Hello  ?  
the truth it seems like another call is coming in  ,   but they can wait  .  
Oh okay  ,  
It must be my daughter calling me  ,   but it's ok  .    What a shame that she would call me right now  .    Aha  ,   So and
Well I think that  ,   that religion divides and unifies at the same time  .    If you have  ,   you know  ,   the same idea or you know  ,   it's the same religion  ,   of course it will unify  ,   but
Because they're  ,   you know  ,   two completely different ways of thinking  .  
let's say  ,   what you say  ,   eva  ,   evangelical  .    I don't have any
Ah
eh  ,   classification  .    I'm only Christian  .  
Hm mm
Because I don't think that the belief is the same  ,   right  .  
You guys wear makeup  ,   and dance and all that  ,   or not  ?  
you know  ,   we talk about the bible  ,   no  ,   no  .   We also sing the  ,   the songs well a touch yes  ,   and you know  ,   things like that  ,   but is not anything
Hm mm
eh  ,   we don't dance or any of that  .   You know  ,   but
Oh  ,   you can wear makeup  ?  
yes  ,   is not  ,   is none of that  .  
yes  ,   because the  ,   the Evangelical one is that they don't even cut their hair  ,   and
Ah  ,   well I don't know
yes I don't know  ,   the the Evangelicals don't cut their hair and they are not supposed to wear makeup  ,   nor use too much jewelry  .  
Hm mm
Sundays singing the songs and and  ,   listening to the bible  ,   learning what the bible says how it lives in our life  .   That is
basically the  ,   the
The concept  ,   aha  .  
Oh  ,   ok  .  
Right  ,   right  ,   no  ,   because i thought that  ,   when you said christian
You know  ,   none of that  .  
But  ,   uh  ,   despite that  ,   nothing  ,   none of that  ,   you know
Right
If i want to go to dance
Uh um  .  
But in  ,   you know  ,   right  ,   right
Look  ,   they have  ,   lets say  ,   a family party  ,   you can go to it  ,   and it's not
Yes  ,   yes  .  
Do you follow  ?    ,   So  ,   after all that everyone else is a sinner  ,   but they don't see that they sinned first
Not me  ,   we are not like that  .   We believe that  ,   you know  ,   even when I go to church  ,   and all that stuff  ,   and that  ,   I am still a sinner  .  
Aha
And because I am human  ,   I´m not perfect  .   But at the same time  ,   if I am with a person that believes  ,   lets say  ,   that she must not cut the
hair  ,   or wear makeup  ,   or only wears skirts  ,   lets say I am invited to a party by them  ,   or something  ,   then I try to  ,   to
to go
yes  ,   in the conditions  ,   exactly  .   Hmmm
And to respect their  ,   their aha  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   when I go to the  ,   I go to the I have visited the church  ,   my aunts church  ,  
and I well  ,   when I go to their place  ,   well yes I use a suit  ,   my  ,   my skirt under the knees  ,   because they don´t use it other way  .  
That is their theory  .   Understand it
Aha
rules and many things that they have to do  ,   before coming to the church  .   And I think one must go to the church  ,   like you always are  .  
Right  ,   right  .  
¿Do you understand or not  ?  
Yes  ,   because i remember some time when  ,   i remember  ,   yes  ,   an invitation from a church  ,   so one of the ladies told me  ,   no  ,   but you
you can't dress like that  ,   because that is an offense to the lord  ,   you coming with clothes  ,   and  ,   well  ,   i always wear pants  ,   and bracelets  ,   and i wear a watch  .  
Uh um  .   Well  ,   and that's what i mean  ,   because i also think  ,   my opinion is that a lot of people  ,   like they don't exactly understand what the bible says  ,   because
That was disoriented  ,   and in
Yes  .   So  ,   i think that when people these days goes  ,   saying all that  ,   no make up  ,   no clothes and stuff like that  ,   they forget
where it was  ,   you know  ,   where everything started  .  
Good afternoon  ,   my name is Gloria  .  
I am Norma  ,   from Atlanta  ,   Georgia  ,   where are you from  ?  
Oh  ,   how are you  ?  
Again we find ourselves  ,  
We are  ,   we are the only ones who speak at this time
yes  ,   I guess  ,  
On that we had to talk because I did not understand that this man said  .  
Good  ,   I have to talk about religion  .  
Yes  ,   unify religions  ,   that religions unified  ,   that is your opinion of homosexuality  .  
From homosexual  ?  
Or the
a man with a man  ,   is that what you're saying  ?  
yes  .  
Oh  ,   okay  .  
I did not understand  .   I did not understand  ,   nothing I said  ,   nothing  .  
yes  ,   that would be ideal  ,  
it will be impossible  .   Is impossible  ,   is ridiculous  .  
Because everybody you know  ,   one is raised differently  .  
You know  .   Ay  ,   I  ,  
Do they call you every day  ?  
yes  ,   most of the time  ,   when I'm home  ,   here always  ,   they call  ,   and I answer  .  
yes  ?   Ah  ,   I  ,   today was the only one I got  .   Yesterday they called me and I didn't get it  .   And the day before yesterday because  ,   from here that I run to the room  ,  
So  ,   anyway  ,   I'm Catholic  .   Then  ,   I now  ,   ah  ,   eh like in fifteen minutes I'm taking my kid to a youth ministry
and he learns  ,   yes  ,   exactly  .   But he doesn't understand that  .   He thinks that
that  ,   he's a teenager  ,   sure  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
Yes  ,   I figure
So  ,   I want him to be  ,   to have even a little bit of  ,   you know  ,   because I
Yes  ,   it's always nice  ,   right  ?  
he  ,   has always gone to church and now he does not  ,   and he fight about it  ,   we are always fighting to go to church
I go alone  ,   because if we are going to fight then is worthless
Of course
to take him
I mean  ,   always ask him  ,   they would listen  ,   but know  ,   they are in a insurgence time
Yes
So  ,   that's a bit difficult  ,   but  ,   they always listen  ,   and always talk to him  ,   not about church  ,   but about the relation with God  ,   and that's really important
Yes  ,   yes
That way he would always have a spiritual base  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   exactly
Of course  ,   because in the moment they would need to go trough a suffer  ,   a catastrophe  ,   you always come back to the supreme being
Yes
No matter what relgion  ,   any religion
Yes
You always go back and look for the only one that can help
Exactly  ,   that exactly  ,   I say that you should not get to that point  ,   You should pray everyday
Yeah
You know  ,   uhm  ,   giving him the time you need for him on Sunday  ,   we go to church on Sundays
Hm mm
giving him an hour  ,   no  ,   he always has to be running  ,   you want from church  ,   and he doesn´t want to go  ,   and we have arguments  ,   and everyone tells me  ,   allow him not to go  ,   and I say
yes  ,   he has to go  ,   forget about it  .   I can talk to everyone and they tell me  ,   no  ,   you´re doing it wrong because
you go with him  ,   and you´re both fighting  ,   what good are you getting from going to church
yes  ,   I mean  ,   just suggest it  .   I mean  ,   don´t force him a lot  ,   because if you force him he´ll get more rebellious
yes  ,   yes  ,   that´s whats happening  .   He´s getting
it´s true  ,   they go to the mall and I don´t like them going to the mall
Yeah
You know  ,   a lot of this boys  ,   their mothers let them go to the mall alone  ,   but I won´t let him go
Yeah
But I tell him  ,   if you find a boy of the same religion  ,   then you can go bowling  ,   or skating  ,   but we´ll see where  ,   where
where we end up tonight
yes  ,   that´s right  .   It´s a little difficult dealing with children  ,   no  ?   when they grow up  ,   they want to go their own way  ,   their
yes  .  
to guide them  ,   right  .  
Hm mm  .   My oldest was the same  .  
Oh yeah  ?  
yes he calls me when he has a problem  ,   yes pray  ,   that's why  ,   you always have to be in good standing with God
Hm mm
so like that you don't have to call anyone to  ,  
Hm mm  .  
to pray for you  .   If you are praying yourself  .  
You know  .  
Ah Aha  ,   aha  .  
Aha  ,   aha  .   So then  ,   I buy it  ?  
Because if you don't have
Hm mm
If you don't have a God  ,   your life is empty  ,   Hm mm
Exactly  ,   that's so right  ,   so right  .   That's what I told him  ,   but he said  ,   do you know what he said the other day  ?   He said  ,   where was God when I went through this
and I told him that that was supposed to happen so he'd learn  ,   oh  ,   when  ,   let me tell you  ,   the dog  ,   a dog was ran over
Where was God when  ,   od od and I  ,   the dog lived but he told me  ,   oh yes  ,   there's a God  ,   because we prayed for that dog  ,   that was
ran over by a car  ,   and  ,   and
Aha  .  
Sure  ,   they do understand  ,   no  ,   understand
Hm mm  .  
Right  ?   And they learn  ,   so if you go on being religious  ,   if you attend church an have devotion  ,   he'll follow
Aha  ,   aha
your good example  .   Sure  ,   because  ,   I mean  ,   not everything  ,   anyway  ,   children learn from their parents  ,   no  ,   the parents are the first teachers
Hm mm
So  ,   he  ,   he  ,   he sometimes  ,   when we go to church  ,   he fall asleep  ,   it's so embarrassing  ,   oh my God  .  
Hm mm
The music puts him to sleep  .   I don't know what gets him sleepy  .   The singing that gets him sleepy  .   And it's an embarrassment because we can't sit in the front  ,   we can sit in the back and he
But don't they have youth programs in your religion  ?  
There  ,   in  the church  ?  
No  ,   I think they have  ,   but when you go to mass  ,   the  ,   the mass  ,   the father preaches about what he wants  .  
Ah  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   aha  .  
Hm mm
but it's at nine in the morning  .   He's not going to want to go to church so early  .   He likes to sleep  .   So we go at twelve  .  
Of course  ,   aha  .  
for him to feel more interested  ,   find friends  ,   because if you really want to be in a gropu  ,   you must have friends  ,   don't you  ?  
yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   yes
In a group you need to find friends  ,   who share your ideas  ,   your interests  ,   this is how you cheer up
Exactly  ,   yes  .   That's why I want him to go tonight  ,   because it's a group of young people
yes
Hm mm
But then he goes like  ,   oh  ,   but I'll have to work with the elder  ,   I don't like working with the elder  ,  
Oh forget it  ,   it's impos  He just wants to watch TV and play computer games  ,   I
Oh
I am fed up with that  ,   I'll switch it off  .   Where you free today  ?  
Ah  ?  
Today is Jewish holiday  .   You don't work  ,   do you  ?  
No  ,   I don't work
Oh  ,   how good  .  
yes  ,   I work with my sons  ,   here at home  .   They make me mad sometimes
Oh  ,   yes  ,   I can imagine  ,   yes I hear them  .   How old are them  ?  
Ah  ,   oh  ,   O  .  K  .   Anyways  ,   eh  ,   how many minutes do we have  ?  
My throat is sore now  ,   you talk  .  
Ah  ,  
and I feel bad because we know that God does not accept that  .  
Yes  .   One has to have one  ,   one in the family  ,   so you can tell  ,   you know  ,   how he was raised and all that  .  
We knew since he was very little  .   And now he is confused and now he doesn't want to go to church cause of what they say  ,   but I found a church that accepts them  .  
yes  .  
Sure  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .    Yes  ,   it's a real hardship  ,   because there are people like
yes  .  
Aha  .  
really  ,   it's  ,   well us in the church we believe in the law of karma  ,   the reaction that you're paying for activities lived out in the previous life  .  
So  ,   for this  ,   but  ,   really  ,   you have your relationship with God  ,   and you should cultivate it  ,   yes  ,   like  ,   it doesn't matter in what way  .    No  ?  
Aha  .  
because the important things is  ,   isn't the covering of your body  ,   the
yeah
what's important is the spiritual soul that you have  ,   not the
yes  ,   yes  ,   exactly  .  
No  ,   and their devotion  ,   that's  ,   that's very important  ,   ¿right  ?  
Uh um  .  
Right  ,   and now  ,   this body is an external cover  ,   that you re act according to the external cover because you are conditioned
Right  ,   right  .  
But  ,   you have to  ,   i don't know  ,   transcend the material platform  ,   ¿right  ?    ,   and look  ,   a more transcendental platform in your relationship with god  .  
Right  ,   many times it's not easy  ,   but there's always a process you can control  ,   right  ,   you can control rules and regulations  .  
That's what i tell him  .   I tell him  ,   "open your bible"  ,   then  ,   he says "Uh  ,   but nobody wants me in church"  ,   these and that  .    .    .  
Uh um  .  
Hm mm
Every day  ,   poor boy does not know to ask  .  
Good
Hello
Hello
My  ,   my name is Gloria  .   How are you  ?  
Good my name is Jennie
Hi
Hi
I gave you
Where are you  ?  
I live in New York
Oh  ,   I'm in Nebraska
Oh Nebraska  ,   my mother is there  .  
yeah
So  ,   we have to talk about religion  .  
And do you find it difficult sometimes to understand what the machine is saying  ?  
I didn't understand anything that he said  ,   but I talked to another lady before this  ,   And it was about religion and  ,   how do you think religion
is accepting homosexuals  ?   If you're against it  ?   something like that about religion  .  
aha because I was listening but I really didn't understand anything he was saying  ,   aha  .  
Really  ,   we should call that man and tell him  ,   that they should put someone who speaks Spanish  .  
yes because that one sounds really bad  .  
I know So Are you Catholic or what religion are you  ?  
Yes I'm Catholic  ,   aha
Catholic  ,   oh  ,   me too  .  
I think so too  .  
yes  ,   yes
aha  ,   I think that  ,   well one can't just  .   like if something bad happens in their life  ,   like a man with a woman  .  
aha
But I really don't understand  ,   so  .   How can I understand  ?   if I'm not like that  .  
That I do not understand  .  
I also knew a boy  ,  
mhm
he was a homosexual
aha
And he also had many married men  ,  
yes
And I really do not understand  .  
No
I don't know
aha  ,   it is an ugly thing
But it happens a bunch because the other day Oprah had a program with many cute boys  .  
aha  .  
aha  .  
wow  ,   it's horrible  ,   it's horrible  ,   but you know  .  
aha
although you want to be this  ,   he'll help you  .    If it's like this that you have to live  ,   he will find your peace and your tranquility  .  
aha
Since my dad doesn't know  ,   his grandfather doesn't know  .  
Aha
So  ,   you know  ,   but at times he sees girls and he likes girls too so  ,   I don't understand  .  
I get it  .    I know  ,   I know
That he preferred to be with a guy because he didn't like how  ,   to feel something soft  ,   he wanted to feel something hard  .  
yes  ,   aha
But he only had a girlfriend because  ,   what he really wanted wasn't normal  .  
yes
only that he didn't let me know  ,   she was ashamed  .  
aha
You know  ,   from other  ,   from the other kids  .  
aha  ,   mhm
And you know  ,   he is a good guy  ,   what it hurts is that he is so good  .  
and  ,   and he appeared to complete  ,   you know  ,   yes  ,   are you Latin or american  ?  
I'm not we  I have a Mexican mother and French father
ah
So well I am both
ah  ,   which parent is which  ?  
My mom is Latina  .  
aha
And my dad is French  .  
What does that mean  ?  
Well my father is is white  ,   he's from here  .   And my mo 
yes  ,   and my mom is a Mexican from Mexico  .  
yes I was born  ,   born here  .  
aha  ,   so it is  ,   and while there's a lot of people  ,   there aren't many people here who speak Spanish  .  
yes  ,   yes  ,   it's very cold today  .  
Oh my God
yes  .   I don't know  ,   you tell me  .   Do you think that homosexuals are Christians  ?  
aha
he tries  ,   because we are Catholics  ,   super Catholics  .  
And sometimes  ,   he chats with other men in the Internet  ,   cla  ,   cla  ,   cla  ,   cla  .  
aha
And  ,   I tell him  ,   keep reading your Bible  .   That  ,   eventually  ,   you are not going to be wanting to be in the Internet  .  
aha
That  ,   he wants Him to come to his door  ,   or help him feel better  ,   release the tension that you have in your mind  .   But  ,   he becomes desperate  ,   he doesn't want to wait  .  
But what the  ,   well what has me confused  ,   is that in the bible it says that a relationship is between a woman  ,  
aha And a man  ,   I know  ,   I know  ,   I know  .  
and a man  .   And that  ,   ah  ,   that says the complete opposite of what the bible says  .  
Well  ,   yes is true  .  
a whore and all that  ,  
aha
that  ,   that he  ,   he forgave her for all her sins  .   if he forgave her  ,   he forgives my son  .  
aha
You know  ,   I don't know because I don't know many people like that  ,   is a shame  .  
aha
You never know when their storm is a big one  .   Being different of the common  .   And you know  ,   you have to hide  ,   you never now  ,   and sometimes they get all over
Aha ah
But here were we used to live  ,   my husband and I
Aha
But put it like that  ,   I do not look like a mexican  ,   if you know what I mean
Aha  ,   and you are a dark Mexican or white mexican
White
Because there are whites that do not have color

<colorcito does not exist as a word so I have no ideea what he means about that>
I'm white but because I have brown eyes and hair too
aha aha
But my husband is well brown and so they say the's the unique Mexican around here  .  
Oh  ,   okay
He is one of those people that can get along with everyone  ,   and If he doesn't like someone
With everyone  ,   yes
Hello  .  
Hi  ,   from Texas
I'm Manuel from Chicago
Okay  ,   we are getting connected everyday now
I think  ,   I think there isn't no one more in the study  ,   right  ?  
It seems like  ,   do you have to wait a lot  ?  
No  ,   The phone ringed
Oh  ,   really  ?    ,   because they called me and I waited a little bit  ,   they couldn't connect me with someone else  ,   so I called  .   And always a call they connect me with you
Mmm  ,   weird
I think there is no one else
Yes  ,   everybody left  ,   I talked to a lady  ,   she told me that she already had like 15 calls
yes
yes
From where  ?  
That  ,   she completed 15 calls of the study
No  ,   i mean  ,   where was she from  ?  
Oh  ,   New York  ,   yes
Oh  ,   I talked to her like two days ago
yes
ah I spoke to Yenny from Nebraska
aha
Eh  ,  
ah  ,   you got to talk to her  ,  
When When I talked about  ,   Well  .   and she calls me Manuel  .  
how funny  .  
Ah  ,   yes  .   I told you she's my sister in law
Yes  ,   yes  ,   I remember yes
Ah  ,  
ah  ,   I  ,   yes  ,   I  ,   I I've told a couple of friends to get into the study but I haven't gotten to talk to them  ,   yes
No  .   Oh  ,   they are already in the study Ah  ,   yes they're already in it  .  
When they had two hundred people that were in the study Was that it was better  .   In other words you have to wait less time  ,   to be connected  .  
Well  ,   no I've just talked to you With Yenni and with another person from Colorado  .  
Ah  ,   yes
Only the  first call I did was from Colorado  .   A gentleman from Colorado  .   yes  ,   then later it was with you  .   Then with Yenni  ,   another time with you  ,   another time with you  .  
Oh  ,   that's good  ,   uh  ,   ¿and what do you want to tell me about religion now  ?  
Oh  ,   oh  ,   let's see what we talked about yesterday  ,   we talked about religion a little bit
yes  ,   a little bit
I don't even remember what  .   But uh  ,   i don't know  ,   what can i tell you about religion  .    .    .   I can tell you about my mom  ,   for example  ,   my mom is
And i was like  ,   oh  ,   my sister was in high school  ,   and then my mom wanted us to go with her to that church  ,   and no way were we going with her there
To that church  ,   because it was too restrictive and we were very little  .   To  ,   i mean  ,   and we were teenagers  ,   no way we were going to stop wearing pants
Or stop cutting our hair
Uh  ,   right
Yeah  ,   and then uh  ,   the church was very weird  ,   they uh  ,   they would go in and start moving everywhere and
and speaking in  ,   or they said things  ,   and they said that they were speaking tongues  ,   and that these trances they got into  ,   that
that was part of of the Holly Spirit that God That was inside them and they did those things And my mom was on that church
Oh  ,   like seven or eight years  .  
Ah  ,   what is your religion  ?  
I don't have a religion  .   Not now
You don't have a preference for any one  .  
No  ,   but ah  ,   when I was growing up  ,   since my mom got into that religion that was so strict and she wanted us to go with her
Ah  ,  
we then decided to go to the Baptist church it wasn't  ,   they didn't have those rules like that  .   But when my mom got into that religion  ,   she also got to believe that Catholics don't
eh  ,   Catholics were wrong  ,   and like the Catholic church  ,   ah  ,   ah ah  ,   you know they have ah  ,   they give much importance to the Virgin Mary
and the  ,   they other  ,   they churches
Yea  ,  
protestant don't  ,   don't don't  ,   pray to the Virgin Mary  ,   nor believe in the Virgin Mary
Ah  ,   well  ,   in in fact in the Catholic  ,   they have saints even for rocks  .  
mhm
But I won't reach the point in which they pray to the saint here  ,   they pray to that saint over there and
yes
ah  ,   each one  ,   no  ?  
hmm
There are people who are offended because I spoke badly about a saint or something  ,   whatever thing
hmm
I  ,   I don't get offended  ,   it doesn't bother me that they talk  ,   everyone can talk and say what they want  ,   and it doesn't offend me  ,   I'm saying
other people are offended  ,   or the religion
yes  ,   yes
ah  ,  
but I think that  ,   either the person is bothered
it's something
I think that  ,   I mean  ,   I think that religions are good  ,   eh and  ,   I think that  ,   I don't know  ,   it's important when one is growing up  ,   the people
for  ,   for teenagers and for kids it's good for them to go to church to learn about other  ,   other people from the same state  .  
I always say there are bad people in the church but there's  ,   uh  ,   a great many kids and young people in the churches  .    Who have good ideas  ,  
And now they give classes for young people  ,   to keep them busy and not walk the streets  .  
mh
They try to keep them busy  ,   from an early age  ,   kids  ,   teaching them  ,   ah  ,   I've seen that they attend lots of courses  ,   they take them
camping and lots of things like that  .  
yes  ,   no  ,   I think it's good  ,   and  ,   I  ,   I mean  ,   it's like  ,   a social structure  ,   they are a community and I think that  ,   that  ,   that
eh  ,   when you move somewhere else  ,   for example  ,   it's okay because you get to meet new friends  .  
in Spanish  ,   for example  ,   then you get to meet lots of people that speak Spanish and you can easily make new friends  ,   I believe that  ,   in that sense  ,   religion is good  ,   right  ?  
I see  ,  
in a way  ,   in a social way  .   The problem is when people  ,   like yesterday  ,   they start thinking that their religion is the only one
but  ,   I  ,   I went to the Baptist church for many years  ,   that was when I was in the University  ,   when I had just started the University in Pue
and  ,   and  ,   it was something good for me  ,   I got to meet lots of young people that liked to take part in activities  ,   good activities
they wouldn't do bad things  ,   I also had contact with  ,   when you are in school  ,   you meet people that do wrong stuff  .  
Many could
mm
No  ,   I said that is good  .  
uhm
It is good that once you are older you can do the things you like and the thing you didn´t like
Now nobody is telling you what to do  .   If you are older and you still go to church you know what you are doing  .  
It always needs to be like that  .   Well  ,   I do not have children and when I have them I don´t know how would I be  ?  
Oh  ,   are you married  ?  
No  ,   I am not married  .  
Some Religions are worse than others  .  
ah  ,   yeah
And they don't  ,   don't provide information so that you make critical  ,   decisions  ,   you have a critical mind and you make the decision that you think is correct  .  
Good evening  .   I'm Joe  .  
yes  .   And I'm Carmen from Chicago  .  
The Chicago  .   How are you Carmen  ?  
Good  .   and you  ?  
yes  ,   a while back  .   You are the father of the girl  ,   right  ?  
yes  .   yes  ,   what a memory Wow
How is everything going over there  ,   good  ?  
Good  ,   thanks a little cold here  .  
yes yes here too it's getting cold also  .   We are having tomorrow already there's another cold front coming and we are going to have temperatures  ,   it's going to snow  .  
so Ah  ,   how much  ?  
to sixty  .  
yes  ,   There  ,   and is the wind strong over there and all that  ?  
yes  ,   yes
yes  .  
Over there it always blows hard  ,   right  ?  
Uh  ?  
The wind is more strong there than in other places  .  
yes  .  
yes  .   I don't like that  .  
Do you know today's subject  ?  
the inscriptions  ,   they can work together  .  
Uh uh  .  
all those things  ,   what do you think about that  ?  
Well  ,   in my opinion religion is good but not so good and not so bad for society  .   There shouldn't um
but some people in my family are Christians  .   One of my uncle he's kind of sick because he's so  ,   so religious  .  
to make them join the church  ,   he tells them that God is going to forgive them  ,   when I go to Puerto Rico  ,   that's the first thing he says to me
yes  .  
seven days a week
Uh huh  .  
Oh  .  
But  .    But I have a lot of family from different religions  .    i have a lot of family who are Jehovah's witnesses  .  
You think it's bad that they go to read the word of God  ?  
yes  ,   you're Catholic  ,   you tell them  ,   I'm Catholic so they won't come back to bother you ever again  .  
Uh huh  .  
my dad taught me since when I was little  ,   I remember my dad always had us kneel by the bed  ,   everyone all around the bed  ,   kneeling to pray
and my dad always told us  ,   you don't need to go Sundays  ,   Sunday in the morning  ,   or Sunday at noon  ,   or Sunday at night  .  
But  ,   there are some people who don't  ,   who need to be stuck in church  .    Ah  ,   to the power  .  
And how do you see this  ,   for example  ,   with the world situation and the religious influences in the government and political decisions  ?  
For for this reason there is a lot  ,   there is
I  ,   well
of war in the middle east that is happening because of religion  .  
Uh um
That  ,   they have used it as a justified guide to do things  .   For example  ,   this Iraq war
In every way  ,   to fight them  ,   so there  ,   of course the Muslims think that God  ,   Allah  ,   is with them  ,   is protecting them  .  
And like that  ,   uh  ,   there is a lot  ,   and the Jewish too  ,   in they way of worshipping they also think that  .  
But  ,   i always think about a thing the bible says  ,   that you will know people by their fruit  ,   the ones in god's side
How they practice  .   Religion is really  ,   the belief of the true worship  ,   because if they don't practice it  ,   like God and his son taught us  ,   well
Yes
even if they didn´t have the victims they hurt close to them
yes
But what´s the sense of changing them to another church if in the other church they´ll find more children
Exactly
And that´s not right
I mean  ,   here in Colorado  ,   uhm  ,   a priest actually died
Hmm
But many of this man´s victims have come forward and they´re suing the Church because
Uh uh
because he got his way for many years  .   And now  ,   after he died  ,   it seems like someone decided to take the initiative and expose
Hmm
That´s very hypocritical and I don´t think God will feel a lot of sympathy for people like that
Uh uh  .   Especially one who abuses children  .  
Exactly  .  
the people from other races said the Virgin was theirs but not for me  ,   because I am Puerto Rican
yes  .  
yes
And very fast  ,   um they send them for three dollars but was full  .   And I don´t know if you hear about the ah uh ah  ,   the face of the Holy Virgin that appeared in
one of those like potato chips and that  .  
And it was sold for millions at Ebay  ,   millions of dollars  .  
But those people are believer  .   Then the  ,   Holy Virgin that appeared here in Chicago it was under an express
it was an oil spot  ,   dirt that was coming down and there the Holy Virgin was painted
Mm  .  
they were bothering the people who were driving by  .  
And there was the Virgin
Oh
And it was crowded every night  ,   every night  .   But one  ,   one came  ,   a Puerto Rican came who didn't believe in that  ,   and said it was a lie
My aunt  ,   since he doesn't believe in that because he is Christian
Mm
he said  ,   God forgive  ,   that that was fetishism  ,   believing in the virgin  .   I also have a friend were i used to work
Uh uh
she always said  ,   mm  ,   Carmen see you tomorrow God willing  ,   uh uh   ,   God willing  ,   the Virgin willing  ,   already
I didn't dare to tell her the Virgin willing because she didn't believe in the Virgin  .   And I told her
And what has brought her to the top  ?   yes  ,   the Puerto Rican call it the Virgin Mary  ,   what other name did others give her  ?  
The ones from here  .  
Uh uh  .  
Guadalupe for the Mexicans  .  
But there were more Mexicans and they mention the virgin of Guadalupe
In Chicago there are many Mexicans
Uh  ,   many  .   And many of them are believers  .  
And  ,   Is that the majority of Latinos in the United States  ?  
Because the church gets full of Mexicans  .  
What Puerto ricans  ?   yes  ,   we live here in Colorado  .  
The majority of Hispanics here are less  .  
Hello  ?  
Ah  ,   Hello  ,   What's your name  ?  
Annie
Annie  ,   Hello  ,   I'm Pilar  .  
Hi  ,   Pilar
Are your from Miami  ?  
yes  .  
Right  ,   we had already talked the other time  .   In fact  ,   Didn't we talk yesterday of  ?   Of religion  ?  
Was it yesterday  ?  
Or the day before  ?  
Okay  ,   I don't remember  .   But  ,  
Well  .  
I don't remember that it was with you  ,   How are you  ?  
Em  ,   I haven't heard you  ,   What did you say  ,   what did you say  ?  
Ah  ?   That how are you  ?  
Ah  .   Ah  ,   fine  ,   fine  .   And you  ?  
Fine  .  
Well  ,   nothing  .   Talking about the topic of  ,   of religion  .   Um  ,  
Again  ,  
Or if  ,   or if you have another topic to talk about  .  
Yes  ,   If you want to talk how is your life  ,   that's fine too
Well  ,   few things have happened in my life
Yes
I'm kind of bad today  .   I've a little of  ,   I'm sick  .   So  ,   I was resting all day and watching TV  ,   So
are you an student  ?    ,   or are you working  ?  
I'm a student  ,   yes
What are you studing  ?  
Engineering  ,   electric engineering
Wow  ,   are you calling from Pennsylvania  ?  
No  ,   from New York
Okay  ,   New York
Mmm
Okay
And you  ?  
How much do you have left  ?  
Are you studing  ?  
yes
Well  ,   I just started the PhD  ,   so I have a lot left
Wow
And what do you do  ?    ,   are you working  ?  
No  ,   I'm home  ,   now  ,   with my daughter who's twenty two months old  .  
Ah really  ?  
I'm expecting the next one  ,   eh  ,   any day now  .  
Ah really  ?   Man  ,   in good time  .  
So  ,   I'm a little uncomfortable I'm dying to have the baby  .   But  ,  
And is the next one a boy  ?  
I don't know  ,   don't know  .  
Oh you don't know  ?  
So  ,   we want to wait to  ,   just a minute  ,   my love  ,   go  ,   go to your room to play  .   We want to wait until we have the baby  ,   to know  ,   you know  ,   what it's going to be
yes  ?  
because I told my  ,   my husband  ,   that with my luck  ,   that they will probably tell us that it will be  ,   let's say  ,   a boy  ,   a girl  ,   and comes out  ,  
The opposite  .  
aha  .  
Or what  ,   it already happened with
I told him  .  
with  ,   the girl  ?   you have a girl now  .  
we also  ,   also didn't find out with her  ,   either  .  
Ah  .  
I didn't want to know because I  ,   I would like to have another girl  ,   but if God gives me a boy  ,   I'm happy with that  .  
Of course  .  
But  ,   i think that if I try to  ,   to know before the the baby is born  ,   it could be that I'm not too happy  ,   so I'll better wait  .  
yes  ,   that's why  .  
That's why  ,  that's why  ,   I  ,   better prefer to wait  ,   and that way I know that I'm not going to have  ,   you know  ,   because  ,   I have many friends that say  ,   ah  ,   I want a boy  ,   a girl  ,  
and  ,   and then  ,   they try to see  ,   before the baby is born  ,  
yes  ,   and then they are disappointed
and whe  yes  ,   and I don't want to do that  ,   I want to be happy with my baby  .  
And the  ,   and the clothes and that  ,   the  ,   if i   ?  
Well  ,   that's a problem  .  
if it's a boy  ,   here they have  ,   eh  ,   I don't know how to say it in Spanish  ,   but it's the stores that  ,   that sell clothes that are already used  .  
Aha  ,   so  ,   what  ,   our plan is  ,   it's to take the girl's clothes  ,  
yes  .  
aha  ,   take the credit  .   Then there  ,   start buyin clothes for boys  .  
Mhm  .   No
Really  ?  
Nothing will happen  ,   the child is not going to turn into
No  ,   it's just that  ,   he does have clothes to wear  ,   that's the important thing  .  
Well  ,   you don't need to be warm here  ,   it's always hot  .  
It's like  ,   you know  ,   I believe that it's just  ,   I believe that they are  ,   there are fifteen to twenty days per year when we have  ,   lets say
Really  ?  
to wear a sweater or long trousers  ,   whatever  .   You know  ,   it's a bit fresh  ,   not so humid but it's nothing like  ,  
to wear a sweater  ,   it's not cold or
I'm so jealous  ,   hey  .   We have both here  ,   extreme hot days during the summer and terrible cold during the winters  .  
Sure  ,   and besides that  ,   being pregnant  ,   you feel the heath  ,   right  ?  
yes  ,   but  ,   yet  ,   you know  ,   eh  ,   I  ,   I think that too but when the girl is all soaked  ,   you know  ,   so  ,   I think it's not only me who feels the heath  .  
Mm  ,   yes  ,   and  ,   are you afraid of giving birth or are you ready now  ,   after your first child  ?  
Eh  ,   no  ,   the first one  ,   eh  ,   he was born through a Cesarean section  .  
yes
It was an emergency  .   It scares me  ,   I don't think much about it  .   I think that  ,   you know  ,   my body knows what he is doing  ,   I know it's going to hurt
Because  ,   when you had the cesarean practiced  ,   did they  .    .  did they put you out  ?   Of course  ,   they have to put you out
yes  ?  
they had to try like seven times before they did it right
Oh
And afterwards  ,   they gave me morphine when they finished  .   That unsettled me  .   I was like fourt  two and a half days with  ,   eh  ,   with vomits and diarrhea
Because  ,   we didn't wanted to give her feeding bottle
Mmm
I wanted to breast feeding her
Yes
And sometimes  ,   here  ,   at hospitals
Don't let
no  ,   you're right  ,   So  ,   he was with her so they know that she wasn't getting bottle or anything
Mmm
Yes  ,   But  ,   you know  ,   was an experience  ,   and if God wants  ,   we will have that experience one more time
No  ,   sure you wont  ,   now you will have a totally different one  ,   but  ,   if this time  ,   in a Natural way  ,   i think is an unique experience  .   For what I've hear  ,   beacuse  ,   I
Oh  ,   how good
And I am already thinking if there are possibilities  .   To start a family  .   The problem is that since I am a student  ,   well  ,   it's hard
No  ,   people  ,   I mean  ,   it's always hard when  ,   for a woman  ,   when you work  .   You never know what comes next  ,   if  ,   if you'll get fired at work  ,   of you won't be able to continue
But  ,   yes  ,   a student getting paid for  ,   that's how it works here  ,   they give you a scholarship  ,   some money
yes
but  ,   they expect results  .   It's like a job  ,   basically
yes
But you have less rights  .   You don't have as much rights as
like for instance  ,   the right to vacations  ,   maternal  ,   I don't know how is it in spanish  ,  
yes
You don't have all that  ,   eh  ,   here  .   So  ,   I don't know if it will be possible  .   But I would like to  ,   because I don't want
I don't want to wait that much  .   I think the right age for having the kids is twenty some  ,   don't you  ?  
Well  ,   we didn't wan  well  ,   we didn't know we could have ki  So  ,   eh  ,   we are already married  ,   it's thirteen to fourteen
Mhm
twelve or thirteen  ,   I don't remember now  .   But  ,   eh  ,   two weeks after we bought the house I got pregnant  .   Of course I didn't get pregnant  ,   I was already four months pregnant
What  ?   ah  ,   you were four months pregnant and you hadn't noticed
No  ,   because I thought it was just stress  ,   stress because of the moving  ,   because of buying the house
Oh
you know  .   Since  ,   sinc we thought  ,   we had been told by the doctors that we could not have children  ,   so  .   I never thoug 
Oh  ,   really  ?   and how  ?   look  ,   they were wrong  ,   thank goodness
yes  ,   so
And how did you finally notice  ?  
eh  ,   because I have a medical condition that causes me a big pain  .   What happened is that I was feeling a great pain  .   And I was thinking that it was coming back
Oh
Because I've had a lot of  ,   eh  ,   I've had four operations
Mhm
I've had plenty of problems
yes
And  ,   that's why I had that much pain
And was it the reason  ,   was it the reason for the cesarean also  ?  
No  ,   the cesarean was due to  ,   honestly  ,   because the doctor didn't want to wait
Oh  ,   e 
He  ,   he  ,   my husband hear him telling the  ,   the  ,   I don't know how is it in spanish  ,  
Oh  ,   yes  ,   me either  ,   midwife I think  ,   aha
mm  ,   ok  ,   that he didn't want to  ,   mm  ,   that he was scared that we would give him  ,   eh  ,   we would  ,   mm  ,     ,    ,  
a lawsuit
yes
Eh  ,   because I was  ,   I didn't have  ,   wait  ,   leave me alone  ,   wait a second  .   I was  ,   supposedly  ,   they said I was of fourty two weeks
Mhm
Forty one weeks
Hello  ?   Hi
Hello  ?   Good  .    .    .  Good afternoon  ,   this is Josefina
Hello  ,   how are you  ?  
Fine  ,   thank you  .   Where are you  ?  
I am in my dorm right now
Your dorm  .   Oh  ,   how cool  ,   in the University  .  
Oh  ,   how cool  .   What do you study  ?  
Eh  .    .   History
I am here in Philadelphia as well  .   Eh  .    .  Have you been long time  ,   eh  ,   receiving calls with the plan  ?   with the program  ?  
Oh  ,   thank you very much
that University is very selective  .   Very  ,   how you say it  .    .    ,   competitive  ,   isn´t it  ?  
Oh  .    .    .   oh  .   Ah  ,   yes  ,   of course  ,   and  
Yes  ,   little by little  ,   right  ?  
Yeah  ,   so  ,   how about it  ?   Well  ,   the subject  ,   I don't know what you think of it  ,   if  .    .    .  
  the recording  .   It said something about religion  ,   about if it is the division  ,   if it is that religion divides or if it actually  
Yeah  .    .    .  
That is the subject  .    .    .   am I correct  ?  
I  Yes  ,   yes  ,   yes  ,   exactly  ,   that is what I understood as well  ,   and that it is very good that you've had experience with different areas of religion  or a different religion  ,   I guess  ,   or people of  ,   of other religions  ,   right  ?  
